Last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again. It seemed to me I stood by the iron gate leading to the drive, and for a while I could not enter, for the way was barred to me. There was a padlock and a chain upon the gate. I called in my dream to the lodge-keeper, and had no answer, and peering closer through the rusted spokes of the gate I saw that the lodge was uninhabited.
No smoke came from the chimney, and the little lattice windows gaped forlorn. Then, like all dreamers, I was possessed of a sudden with supernatural powers and passed like a spirit through the barrier before me. The drive wound away in front of me, twisting and turning as it had always done, but as I advanced I was aware that a change had come upon it; it was narrow and unkept, not the drive that we had known. At first I was puzzled and did not understand, and it was only when I bent my head to avoid the low swinging branch of a tree that I realised what had happened. Nature had come into her own again and, little by little, in her stealthy, insidious way had encroached upon the drive with long, tenacious fingers. The woods, always a menace even in the past, had triumphed in the end. They crowded, dark and uncontrolled, to the borders of the drive. The beeches with white, naked limbs leant close to one another, their branches intermingled in a strange embrace, making a vault above my head like the archway of a chuich. And there were other trees as we!, trees that I did not recognise, squat oaks and tortured elms that straggled cheek by jowl with the beeches.
and had thrust themselves out of the quiet earth, along with monster shrubs and plants, non© of which I remembered.
The drive was a ribbon now, a thread of its former self, with gravel surface gone, and choked with grass and moss. The trees had thrown out low branches, making an impediment to progress; the gnarled roots looked like skeleton claws. Scattered here and again amongst this jungle growth I would recognise shrubs that had been land-marks in our rime, things of culture and of grace, hydrangeas whose blue heads had been famous. No hand had checked their progress, and they had gone native now, rearing to monster hei^t without a bloom, black and ugly as the nameless parasites that grew beside them.
On and on, now east, now west, woimd the poor thread that once had been our drive. Sometimes I thought it lost, but it appeared again, beneath a fallen tree perhaps, or struggling on the other side of a muddied ditch created by the winter rains. I had not thought the way so long. Surely the miles had multiplied, even as the trees had done, and this path led but to a labyrinth, some choked wilderness, and not to the house at all. I came upon it suddenly; the approach masked by the unnatural growth of a vast shrub that spread in all dir-ctions, and I stood, my heart thumping in my breast, the strange prick of tears behind my eyes.
There was Manderley, our Manderley, secretive and silent as it had always been, the grey stone shining in the moonlight of my dream, the mullioned windows reflecting the green lawns and the terrace. Time could not wreck the perfect symmetry of those walls, nor the site itself, a jewel in the hollow of a hand.
The terrace sloped to the lawns, and the lawns stretched to the sea, and turning I could see the sheet of silver, placid under the moon, like a lake undisturbed by wind or storm. No waves would come to ruffle this dream water, and no bulk of cloud, wind-driven from the west, obscure the clarity of this pale sky. I turned again to the house, and though it stood inviolate, untouched, as though we ourselves bad left but yesterday, I saw that the garden had obeyed the jungle law.
even as liie woods had done. The rhododendrons stood fifty feet high, twisted and entwined with bracken, and they had entered into alien marriage with a host of nameless shrubs, poor, bastard things that clung about their roots as though conscious of their spurious origin. A lilac had mated with a copper beech, and to bind them yet more closely to one another the malevolent ivy, always an enemy to grace, had thrown her tendrils about the pair and made them prisoners. Ivy held prior place in this lost garden, the long strands crept across the lawns, and soon would encroach upon the house itself. There was another plant too, some halfbreed from the woods, whose seed had been scattered long ago beneath the trees and then forgotten, and now, marching in unison with the ivy, thrust its ugly form like a giant rhubarb towards the soft grass where the dajffodils had blown.
Nettles were everywhere, the van-guard of the army. They choked the terrace, they sprawled about the paths, they leant, vulgar and lanky, against the very windows of the house. They made indifferent sentinels, for in many places their ranks had been broken by the rhubarb plant, and they lay with crumpled heads and listless stems, making a pathway for the rabbits. I left the drive and went on to the terrace, for the nettles were no barrier to me, a dreamer, I walked enchanted, and nothing held me back.
Moonlight can play odd tricks upon the fancy, even upon a dreamer's fancy. As I stood there, hushed and still, I could swear that the house was not an empty shell but lived and breathed as it had lived before.
Light came from the windows, the curtains blew softly in the night air, and there, in the library, the door would stand half opep as we had left it, 'with my handkerchief on the table beside the bowl of autumn roses.
The room would bear witness to our presence. The little heap of library books marked ready to return, and the discarded copy of The Times. Ash-trays, with the stub of a cigarette; cushions, with the imprint of our heads upon them, lolling in the chairs; the charred embers of our log fire still smouldering against the morning. And Jasper, dear Jasper,
witli his soulful eyes and great, sagging jowl, would be stretched upon the floor, his tail a-thump when he heard his master s footsteps.
A cloud, hitherto unseen, came upon the moon, and hovered an instant like a dark hand before a face. The illusion went with it, and the lights in the windows were extinguished. I looked upon a desolate shell, soulless at last, unhaunted, with no whisper of the past about its staring walls.
The house was a sepulchre, our fear and suffering lay buried in the ruins. There would be no resurrection. When I thought of Manderley in my waking hours I would not be bitter. I should thinlk of it as it might have been, could I have lived there -without fear, I should remember the rosegarden in summer, and the birds that sang at dawn. Tea under the chestnut tree, and the murmur of the sea coming up to us from the lawns below.
I would think of the blo-wn lilac, and the Happy Valley. These things were permanent, they could not be dissolved. They were memories that cannot hurt. All this I resolved in my dream, while the clouds lay across the face of the moon, for like most sleepers I knew that I dreamed. In reality I lay many hundred miles away in an alien land, and would wake, before many seconds had passed, in the bare little hotel bedroom, comforting in its very lack of atmosphere, I would sigh a moment, stretch myself and turn, and opening my eyes, be bewildered at that glittering sim, that hard, clean sky, so different from the soft moonlight of my dream. The day would lie before us both, long no doubt, and uneventful, but fraught with a certain stillness, a dear tranquillity we had not known before. We would not talk of Manderley, I would not tell my dream. For Manderley was ours no longer. Manderley was no more.
WE CAN never go back again, tbat much is certain. The past is still too close to us. The things we have tried to forget and put behind us would stir again, and that sense of fear, of furtive unrest, struggling at length to blind unreasoning panic— now mercifully stilled, thank God— might in some manner xmf oreseen become a living companion, as it had been before.
He is wonderfully patient and never complains, not even when he remembers... which happens, I think, rather more often than he would have me know.
I can tell by the way he will look lost and puzzled suddenly, all expression dying away from his dear face as though swept clean by an unseen hand, and in its place a mask will form, a sculptured thing, formal and cold, beautiful still but lifeless. He will fall to smoking cigarette after cigarette, not bothering to extinguish them, and the glowing stubs will lie around on the ground like petals. He will talk quickly and eagerly about nothing at all, snatching at any subject as a panacea to pam. I believe there is a theory that men and women emerge finer and stronger after suffering, and that to advance in this or any world we must endure ordeal by fire. This we have done in full measure, ironic though it seems. We have both known fear, and loneliness, and very great distress. I suppose sooner or later in the life of everyone comes a moment of trial. We all of us have our particular devil who rides us and torments us, and we must give battle in the end. We have conquered ours, or so we believe.
The devil does not ride us any more. We have come
tiirougli iir crisis, not unscathed of course. His premonition of disaster was correct from the beginning; and like a ranting actress in an indiiSerent play, I mi^t say that we have paid for freedom. But I have had enough melodrama in this life, and would willingly give my five senses if they could ensure us our present peace and seciirity. Happiness is not a possession to he prized, it is a quality of thought, a state of mind. Of course we have our moments of depression; but there are other moments too, when time, unmeasured by the clock, runs on into eternity and, catching his smile, I know we are together, we march in unison, no clash of thought or of opinion makes a harrier between us.
We have no secrets now from one another. All things are shared. Granted that our little hotel is dull, and the food indifferent, and that day after day dawns very much the same, yet we would not have it otherwise. We should meet too many of the people he knows in any of the big hotels. We both appreciate simplicity, and if we are sometimes bored— well, boredom is a pleasing antidote to fear. We live very much by routine, and I— I have developed a genius for reading aloud. The only time I have known him show impatience is when the postman lags, for it means we must wait another day before the arrival of our English mail. We have tried wireless, but the noise is such an irritant, and we prefer to store up our excitement; the result of a cricket match played many days ago means much to us.
Oh, the Test matches that have saved us from ennui, the boxing bouts, even the billiard scores. Finals of schoolboy sports, dog racing, strange little competitions in the remoter counties, all these are grist to our hungry mill. Sometimes old copies of the Field come my way, and I am transported from this indifferent island to the realities of an English spring. I read of chalk streams, of the mayfly, of sorrel growing in green meadows, of rooks circling above the woods as they used to do at Manderley. The smell of wet earth conies to me from those thumbed and tattered pages, the sour tang of moorland peat, the feel of soggy moss spattered white in places by a herons droppings.
Once there was an article on wood pigeons, and as I read it aloud it seemed to me that once again I was in the deep woods at Manderley, with pigeons fluttering above my head. I heard their soft, complacent call, so comfortable and cool on a hot summer’s afternoon, and there would be no disturbing of their peace until Jasper came loping through the undergrowth to find me, his damp muzzle questing the ground. Like old ladies caught at their ablutions, the pigeons would flutter from their hiding-place, shocked into silly agitation, and, making a monstrous to-do with their wings, streak away from us above the tree-tops, and so out of sight and sound. When they were gone a new silence would come upon the place, and I— uneasy for no known reason— would realise that the sun no longer wove a pattern on the rustling leaves, that the branches had grown darker, the shadows longer; and back at the house there would be fresh raspberries for tea. I would rise from my bed of bracken then, shaking the feathery dust of last years leaves from my skirt and whistling to Jasper, set off towards the house, despising myself even as I walked for my hurrying feet, my one swift glance behind.
How strange that an article on wood pigeons could so recall the past and make me falter as I read aloud. It was the grey look on his face that made me stop abruptly, and turn the pages until I found a paragraph on cricket, very practical and dull— Middlesex batting on a dry wicket at the Oval and piling up interminable dreary runs. How I blessed tliose stolid, flannelled figures, for in a few minutes his face had settled back into repose, the colour had returned, and he was deriding the Surrey bowling in healthy irritation.
We were saved a retreat into the past, and I had learnt my lesson. Read English news, yes, and EngHsh sport, politics and pomposity, but in future keep the things that hurt to myself alone. They can be my secret indulgence. Colour and scent and sound, rain and the lapping of water, even the mists of autumn and the smell of the flood tide, these are memories of Manderley that will not be denied. Some people have a vice of reading Bradshaws. They plan innumerable journeys
across country for tibe fun of linking up impossible connections. My bobby is less tedious, if as strange. I am a mine of information on the English countryside. I know the name of every owner of every British moor, yes— and their tenants too. I know how many grouse are killed, how many partridge, how many head of deer. I know where trout are rising, and where the salmon leap. I attend all meets, I follow every ran. Even the names of those who walk hound puppies are familiar to me. The state of the crops, the price of fat cattle, the mysterious ailments of swine, I relish them all. A poor pastime, perhaps, and not a very intellectual one, but I breathe the air of England as I read, and can face this glittering sky with greater courage.
The scrubby vineyards and the crumbling stones become things of no account, for if I wish I can give rein to my imagination, and pick foxgloves and pale campions from a wet, streaking hedge.
Poor whims of fancy, tender and un-harsh. They are the enemy to bitterness and regret, and sweeten this exile we have brought upon ourselves.
Because of them I can enjoy my afternoon, and return, smiling and refreshed, to face the little ritual of our tea. The order never varies. Two slices of bread-and-butter each, and China tea. What a hide-bound couple we must seem, clinging to custom because we did so in England. Here, on this clean balcony, white and impersonal with centuries of sun, I think of half-past four at Manderley, and the table drawn before the library fire. The door fiung open, punctual to the minute, and the performance, never-varying, of the laying of the tea, the silver tray, the kettle, the snowy cloth. While Jasper, his spaniel ears a-droop, feigns indiflFerence to the arrival of the cakes. That feast was laid before us always, and yet we ate so little.
Those dripping crumpets, I can see them now. Tiny crisp wedges of toast, and piping-hot, flaky scones. Sandwiches of unknown nature, mysteriously flavoured and quite delectable, and that very special gingerbread. Angel cake, that melted in the mouth, and his rather stodgier companion, bursting with
peel and raisins. There was enough food there to keep a starving family for a week. I never knew what happened to it all, and the waste used to worry me sometimes.
But I never dared ask Mrs. Danvers what she did about it She would have looked at me in scorn, smiling that freezing, superior smile of hers, and I can imagine her saying: ‘'There were never any complaints when Mrs. de Winter was alive’ Mrs. Danvers. I wonder what she is doing now. She and Favell. I think it was the expression on her face that gave me my first feeling of unrest. Instinctively I thought, “She is comparing me to Rebecca”; and sharp as a sword the shadow came between us....
Well, it is over now, finished and done with. I ride no more tormented, and both of us are free. Even my faithful Jasper has gone to the happy hunting grounds, and Manderley is no more. It lies like an empty shell amidst the tangle of the deep woods, even as I saw it in my dream. A multitude of weeds, a colony of birds. Sometimes perhaps a tramp will wander there, seeking shelter from a sudden shower of rain and, if he is stout-hearted, he may walk there with impunity. But your timid fellow, your nervous poacher— the woods of Manderley are not for him. He might stumble upon the little cottage in the cove and he would not he happy beneath its tumbled roof, the thin rain heating a tattoo. There might linger there still a certain atmosphere of stress.... That comer in the drive, too, where the trees encroach upon the gravel is not a place in which to pause, not after the sun has set. When the leaves rustle, they sound very much like the stealthy movement of a woman in evening dress, and when -they shiver suddenly, and fall, and scatter away along the ground, they might be the patter, patter of a woman's hurrying footsteps, and the mark in the gravel the imprint of a highheeled satin shoe.
It is when I remember these things that I turn with relief to the prospect from our balcony. No shadows steal upon this hard glare, tlie stony vineyards shimmer in the sun and the bougainvillaea is white with dust. I may one day look upon it with affection. At the moment it inspires me, if not
with love, at least with confidence. And confidence is a quality I prize, although it has come to me a little late in the day. I suppose it is his dependence upon me that has made me bold at last. At any rate I have lost my diffidence, my timidity, my shyness with strangers. I am very different from that self who drove to Manderley for the first time, hopeful and eager, handicapped by a rather desperate gaucherie and filled with an intense desire to please. It was my lack of poise of course that made such a bad impression on people like Mrs. Danvers. What must I have seemed like after Rebecca? I can see myself now, memory spanning the years like a bridge, with straight, bobbed hair and youthful, unpowdered face, dressed in an ill-fitting coat and skirt and a jumper of my own creation, trailing in the wake of Mrs. Van Hopper like a shy, uneasy colt. She would precede me in to lunch, her short body ill-balanced upon tottering, high heels, her fussy, frilly blouse a complement to hex large bosom and swinging hips, her new hat pierced with a monster quiU aslant upon her head, exposing a wide expanse of forehead bare as a schoolboy's knee. One hand carried a gigantic bag, the kind that holds passports, engagement diaries, and bridge scores, while the other hand toyed with that inevitable lorgnette, the enemy to other people's privacy.
She would make for her usual table in the corner of the restaurant, close to the window, and lifting her lorgnette to her small pig's eyes survey the scene to right and left of her, then she would let the lorgnette fall at length upon its black ribbon and utter a little exclamation of disgust: 'Not a single well-known personality. I shall tell the management they must make a reduction on my bill. What do they think I come here for? To look at the page-boys?" And she would summon the waiter to her side, her voice sharp and staccato, cutting the air like a saw.
How different the little restaurant where we eat to-day to that^vast dining-room, ornate and ostentatious, the hotel Cot© d Azur at Monte Carlo; and how different my present companion, his steady, well-shaped hands peeling a mandarin in quiet, methodical fashion, looking up now and again from
Ms task to smile at me, compared to Mrs. Van Hopper, her fat, bejewelled fingers questing a plate heaped Mgh with ravioli, her eyes darting suspiciously from her plate to mine for fear I should have made the better choice. She need not have disturbed herself, for the waiter, with the imcaimy swiftness of Ms kind, had long sensed my position as inferior and subservient to hers, and had placed before me a plate of ham and tongue that somebody had sent back to the cold buffet half-an-hour before as badly carved. Odd, that resentment of servants, and their obvious impatience. I remember staying once with Mrs. Van Hopper in a country house, and the maid never answered my timid beU, or brought up my shoes, and early morning tea, stone cold, was dumped outside my bedroom door. It was the same at the Cte d'Azur, though to a lesser degree, and sometimes the studied indifference turned to familiarity, smirking and offensive, wMch made buying stamps from the reception clerk an ordeal I would avoid. How young and inexperienced I must have seemed, and how I felt it, too. One was too sensitive, too raw, there were thorns and pin-pricks in so many words that in reality fell lightly on the air.
I remember well that plate of ham and tongue. It was dry, unappetising, cut in a wedge from the outside, but I had not the courage to refuse it. We ate in silence, for Mrs. Van Hopper liked to concentrate on food, and I could teU by the way the sauce ran down her dhdm that her dish of ravioli pleased her.
It was not a sight that engendered in me great appetite for my own cold choice, and looking away from her I saw that the table next to ours, left vacant for three days, was to be occupied once more. The maltre dlidtel, with the particular bow reserved for Ms more special patrons, was ushering the new arrival to his place.
Mrs. Van Hopper put down her fork, and reached for her lorgnette. I blushed for her wMle she stared, and the newcomer, unconscious of her interest, cast a wondering eye over tlie menu. Then Mrs. Van Hopper folded her lorgnette with
a snap, and leant across the table to me, her small eyes bright with excitement, her voice a shade too loud.
'Ifs Max de Winter, she said, "the man who owns Manderley. You V© heard of it, of course. He looks ill, doesn't he? They say he can't get over his wife's death. ,.
I WONDER what my life would be to-day, if Mrs. Van Hopper had not been a snob.
Funny to think that the course of my existence hung like a thread upon that quality of hers. Her curiosity was a disease, almost a mania. At first I had been shocked, wretchedly embarrassed; I would feel like a whipping boy who must bear his master s pains when I watched people laugh behind her back, leave a room hurriedly upon her entrance, or even vanish behind a Service door on the corridor upstairs. For many years now she had come to the hotel Cte d'Azur, and, apart from bridge, her one pastime, which was notorious by now in Monte Carlo, was to claim visitors of distinction as her friends had she but seen them once at the other end of the post-office. Somehow she would manage to introduce herself, and before her victim had scented danger she had proffered an invitation to her suite. Her method of attack was so downright and sudden that there was seldom opportunity to escape. At the Cdte d'Azur she staked a claim upon a certain sofa in the lounge, midway between the reception hall and the passage to the restaurant, and she would have her coffee there after luncheon and dinner, and all who came and went must pass her by. Sometimes she would employ me as a bait to draw her prey, and, hating my errand, I would be sent
or paper, the address o£ some shop or oiher, the sudden discovery of a mutual friend. It seemed as though notables must be fed to her, much as invalids are spooned their jelly; and though titles were preferred by her, any face once seen in a social paper served as well. Names scattered in a gossip column, authors, artists, actors and their kind, even the mediocre ones, as long as she had learnt of them in print.
I can see her as though it were but yesterday, on that unforgettable afternoon— never mind how many years ago— when she sat on her favourite sofa in the lounge, debating ber method of attack. I could tell by ber abrupt manner, and the way she tapped her lorgnette against her teeth, that she was questing possibilities. I knew, too, when she had missed the sweet and rushed through dessert, that she had wished to finish luncheon before the new arrival and so install herself where he must pass. Suddenly she turned to me, her small eyes alight.
"Go upstairs quickly and find that letter from my nephew. You remember, the one written on his honeymoon, with the snapshot. Bring it down to me right away.”
I saw then that her plans were formed, and the nephew was to be the means of introduction. Not for the first time I resented the part that I must play in her schemes. Like a juggler's assistant I produced the props, then silent and attentive I waited on my cue. This new-comer would not welcome intrusion, I felt certain of that. In the little I had learnt of him at luncheon, a smattering of hearsay garnered by her ten months ago from the daily papers and stored in her memory for future use, I could imagine, in spite of my youth and inexperience of the world, that he would resent this sudden bursting in upon bis solitude. Wby be should have chosen to come to the Cte d'Aur at Monte Carlo was not our concern, his problems were his own, and anyone but Mrs. Van Hopper would have understood. Tact was a quality unknown to her, discretion too, and because gossip was the breath of life to her this stranger must be served for her dissection. I found the letter in a pigeon-hole in her desk, and hesitated a
moment before going down again to the lounge. It seemed to me, rather senselessly, that I was allowing him a few more moments of seclusion.
I wished I had the courage to go by the Service staircase and so by roundabout way to the restaurant, and there warn biTTi of the ambush. Convention was too strong for me though, nor did I know how I should frame my sentence. There was nothing for it but to sit in my usual place beside Mrs. Van Hopper while she, like a large, complacent spider, spun her wide net of tedium about the stranger s person.
I had been longer than I thought, for when I returned to the lounge I saw he had already left the dining-room, and she, fearful of losing him, had not waited for the letter, but had risked a bare-faced introduction on her own. He was even now sitting beside her on the sofa. I walked across to them, and gave her the letter without a word. He rose to his feet at once, while Mrs. Van Hopper, flushed with her success, waved a vague hand in my direction and mumbled my name.
“Mr. de Winter is having coffee with us, go and ask the waiter for another cup," she said, her tone just casual enough to warn him of my footing. It meant I was a youthful thing and unimportant, and that there was no need to include me in the conversation. She always spoke in that tone when she wished to be impressive, and her method of introduction was a form of self-protection, for once I had been taken for her daughter, an acute embarrassment for us both. This abruptness showed that I could safely be ignored, and women would give me a brief nod which served as a greeting and a dismissal in one, while men, with large relief, would realise they could sink back into a comfortable chair without offending courtesy.
It was a surprise, therefore, to find that this new-comer remained standing on his feet, and it was he who made a signal to the waiter.
“Tm afraid I must contradict you,” he said to her, “you are both having coffee with me”; and before I knew what
had happened he was sitting in my usual hard chair, and I was on the sofa beside Mrs. Van Hopper.
For a moment she looked annoyed, this was not what she had intended, but she soon composed her face, and idirusting her large self between me and the table she leant forward to his chair, talking eagerly and loudly, fluttering the letter in her hand.
''You know I recognised you just as soon as you walked into the restaurant,’ she said, "and I thou^t, 'Why, there’s Mr. de Winter, Billy’s friend, I simply must show him those snaps of BiUy and his bride taken on their honeymoon, and here they are. There’s Dora. Isn’t she just adorable? That little, slim waist, those great big eyes. Here they are sunbatliing at Pahn Beach. Billy is crazy about her, you can imagine. He had not met her of course when he gave that party at Claridge’s, and where I saw you first. But I dare say you don’t remember an old woman like me?”
This with a provocative glance, and a gleam of teeth.
“On the contrary, I remember you very well,” he said, and before she could trap him into a resurrection of their first meeting he had handed her his cigarette case, and the business of lighting-up stalled her for the moment. "I don’t think I should care for Palm Beach,” he said, blowing out the match, and glancing at him I thought how unreal he would look against a Florida background. He belonged to a walled city of the fifteenth century, a city of narrow, cobbled streets, and thin spires, where the inhabitants wore pointed shoes and worsted hose. His face was arresting, sensitive, medieval in some strange inexplicable way, and I was reminded of a portrait seen in a gallery I had forgotten where, of a certain Gentleman Unknown. Could one but rob him of his English tweeds, and put him in black, with lace at his throat and wnsts, he would stare down at us in our new world from a long distant past— a past where men walked cloaked at night, and stood in the shadow of old doorways, a past of narrow stairways and dim dungeons, a past of whispers in the dark, of shimmering rapier blades, of silent, exquisite courtesy.
i I wislied I could remember the Old Master who had painted that portrait. It stood in a corner of the gallery, and the eyes followed one from the dusky frame... They were talking though, and I had lost the thread of conversation. "'No, not even twenty years ago,'’ he was saying. “That sort of thing has never amused me.”
I heard Mrs. Van Hopper give her fat, complacent laugh.
“If Billy had a home like Manderley he would not want to play aroimd in Palm Beach,” she said. “Im told it’s like fairy-land, there’s no other word for it.”
She paused, expecting him to smile, but he went on smoking his cigarette, and I noticed, faint as gossamer, the line between his brows.
“I’ve seen pictures of it, of course,” she persisted, “and it looks perfectly enchanting. I remember Billy telling me it had all those big places beat for beauty. I wonder you can ever bear to leave it.”
His silence now was painful, and would have been patent to anyone else, but she ran on like a clumsy goat, trampling and trespassing on land that was preserved, and I felt the colour flood my face, dragged with her as I was into humiliation.
“Of course you Englishmen are all the same about your homes,” she said, her voice becoming louder and louder,
“you depreciate them so as not to seem proud. Isn’t there a minstrels’ gallery at Manderley, and some very valuable portraits?” She turned to me by way of explanation. “Mr. de Winter is so modest he won’t admit to it, but I believe that lovely home of his has been in his family’s possession since the Conquest. They say that minstrels’ gallery is a gem. I suppose your ancestors often entertained royalty at Manderley, Mr. de Winter?”
This was more than I had hitherto endured, even from her, but the swift lash of his reply was unexpected, “Not since Ethelred,” he said, “the one who was called Unready. In fact, it was while staying with my family that the name was given him. He was invariably late for dinner.”
She deserved it, of course, and I waited for her change
o£ face, but incredible as it may seem bis words were lost on ber, and I was left to writbe in hex stead, feeHng like a child that had been smacked.
“Is that really so?'" she blundered. “I'd no idea. My history is very shaky, and the kings of England always muddled me. How interesting though. I must write and tell my daughter, she's a great scholar."
There was a pause, and I felt the colour flood into my face. I was too young, that was the trouble. Had I been older I would have caught his eye and smiled, her unbelievable behaviour making a bond between us; but as it was I was stricken into shame, and endured one of the frequent agonies of youth.
I think he realised my distress, for he leant forward in his chair and spoke to me, his voice gentle, asking if I would have more cofEee, and when I refused and shook my head I felt that his eyes were still upon me, puzzled, reflective. He was pondering my exact relationship to her, and wondering whether he must bracket us together in futility.
“What do you think of Monte Carlo, or don't you think of it at aU?” he said. This including of me in the conversation found me at my worst, the raw ex-schoolgirl, redelbowed and lanky-haired, and I said something obvious and idiotic about the place being artificial, but before I could finish my halting sentence Mrs. Van Hopper interrupted.
“She’s spoilt, Mr. de Winter, that's her trouble. Most girls would give their eyes for the chance of seeing Monte.”
“Wouldn’t that rather defeat the purpose?” he said smiling.
She shrugged her shoulders, blowing a great cloud of cigarette smoke into the air. I don't think she understood him for a moment- “I’m faithful to Monte,” she told him; “the English winter gets me down, and my constitution just won’t stand it. What brings you here? You’re not one of the regulars. Are you going to play Chemy,' or have you brought your golf-clubs?”
“I have not made up my mind,” he said, “I came away in rather a hurry.”
l His own words must have jolted a memory, for his face clouded again and he frowned very slightly. She babbled on, impervious. "'Of course you miss the fogs at Manderley, it’s quite another matter; the west country must be delightful in the spring.” He reached for the ash-tray, squashing his cigarette, and I noticed the subtle change in his eyes, the indefinable something that lingered there, momentarily, and I felt I had looked upon something personal to himself with which I had no concern.
""Yes,” he said shortly, ""Manderley was looking its best.”
A silence fell upon us, during a moment or two, a silence that brought something of discomfort in its train, and stealing a glance at him I was reminded more than ever of my Gentleman Unknown who, cloaked and secret, walked a corridor by night. Mrs. Van Hopper’s voice pierced my dream like an electric beU.
""I suppose you know a crowd of people here, though I must say Monte is very dull this winter. One sees so few well-known faces. The Duke of Middlesex is here in his yacht, but I haven’t been aboard yet.” She never had, to my knowledge. ""You know Nell Middlesex of course,” she went on. ""What a charmer she is. They always say that second child isn’t his, but I don’t believe it. People will say anything, won’t they, when a woman is attractive? And she is so very lovely. Tell me, is it true the Caxton-Hyslop marriage is not a success?” She ran on, through a tangled fringe of gossip, never seeing that these names were alien to him, they meant nothing, and that as she prattled unaware he grew colder and more silent. Never for a moment did he interrupt or glance at his watch; it was as though he had set himself a standard of behaviour, since the original lapse when he had made a fool of her in front of me, and clung to It grimly rather than ofFend again. It was a pageboy in the end who released him, with the news that a dressmaker awaited Mrs. Van Hopper in the suite.
He got up at once,^ pushing back his chair. ""Don’t let me keep you,” he said. ""Fashions change so quickly nowadays they may even have altered by the time you get upstairs.”
The sting did not touch her, she accepted it as a pleasantry. “It’s so dehghtfui to have run into you like this, Mr. de Winter,” she said, as we went towards the lift; “now Tve been brave enough to break the ice I hope I shall see something o£ you. You must come and have a drink some time in the suite. I may have one or two people coming in tomorrow evening. Why not join us?” I turned away so that I should not watch him search for an excuse.
“I’m sorry,” he said, “to-morrow I am probably driving to Sospel, I’m not sure when I shall get back.”
Reluctantly she left it, but we stiU hovered at the entrance to the lift.
“I hop© they’ve given you a good room, the place is half empty, so if you are uncomfortable mind you make a fuss. Your valet has unpacked for you, I suppose?” This familiarity was excessive, even for her, and I caught a glimpse of his expression.
“I don’t possess one,” he said quietly, “perhaps you would like to do it for me?”
This time his shaft had found its mark, for she reddened, and laughed a little awkwardly.
‘Why, I hardly think...” she began, and then suddenly, and unbelievably she turned upon me. “Perhaps you could make yourself useful to Mr. de Winter, if he wants anything done. You’re a capable child in many ways.”
There was a momentary pause, while I stood stricken, waiting for his answer. He looked down at us, mocking, faintly sardonic, a ghost of a smile on his lips.
“A charming suggestion,” he said, “but I cling to the family motto. He travels the fastest who travels alone. Perhaps you have not heard of it.”
And without waiting for her answer he turned and left us.
“What a funny thing,” said Mrs. Van Hopper, as we went upstairs in the lift. “Do you suppose that sudden departure was a form of humour? Men do such extraordinary things. I remember a well-known writer once who used to dart down the Service staircase whenever he saw me coming.
I suppose he had a penchant for me and wasn't sure of himself. However, I was younger then."
The lift stopped with a jerk. We arrived at our floor. The page-boy flung open the gates. “By-the-way, dear," she said, as we walked along the corridor, ‘‘don't think I mean to be unkind, but you put yourself just a teeny bit forward this afternoon. Your efforts to monopolise the conversation quite embarrassed me, and Tm sure it did him. Men loathe that sort of thing."
I said nothing. There seemed no possible reply. “Oh, come, don't sulk,” she laughed, and shrugged her shoulders; “after all, I am responsible for your behaviour here, and surely you can accept advice from a woman old enough to be your mother. Eh bien, Blaize, je viens.. and humming a tune she went into the bedroom where the dressmaker was waiting for her.
I knelt on the window seat and looked out upon the afternoon. The sun shone very brightly still, and there was a gay high wind. In half-an-hour we should be sitting to our bridge, the windows tightly closed, the central heating turned to the full. I thought of the ash-trays I would have to clear, and how the squashed stubs, stained with lipstick, would sprawl in company with discarded chocolate creams. Bridge does not come easily to a mind brought up on Snap and Happy Families; besides, it bored her friends to play with me.
I felt my youtliful presence put a curb upon their conversation, much as a parlour-maid does until the arrival of dessert, and they could not fling themselves so easily into the melting-pot of scandal and insinuation. Her men-friends would assume a sort of forced heartiness, and ask me jocular questions about history or painting, guessing I had not long left school and that this would be my only foim of conversation.
I sighed, and turned away from the window. The sun was so full of promise, and the sea was whipped white with a meny wind. I thought of that comer in Monaco which I had passed a day or two ago, and where a crooked house
leant to a cobbled square. High up in the tumbled roof there was a window, narrow as a slit. It might have held a presence medieval; and, reaching to the desk for pencil and paper, I sketched in fancy with an absent mind a profile, pale and aquiline. A sombre eye, a high-bridged nose, a scornful upper lip. And I added a pointed beard and lace at the throat, as the painter had done, long ago in a different time.
Someone knocked at the door, and the lift-boy came in with a note in his hand. “Madame is in the bedroom,” I told him, but he shook his head and said it was for me. I opened it, and found a single sheet of note-paper inside, with a few words written in an unfahiiliar hand.
“Forgive me. I was very rude this afternoon.” That was all. No signature, and no beginning. But my name was on the envelope, and spelt correctly, an unusual thing.
“Is there any answer?” asked the boy.
I looked up from the scrawled words. “No,” I said. “No, there isn’t any answer.”
When he had gone I put the note away in my pocket, and turned once more to my pencil drawing, but for no known reason it did not please me any more, the face was stiff and Hfeless, and the lace collar and the beard were like props in a charade.
The morning after the bridge party Mrs. Van Hopper woke with a sore throat and a temperature of a hundred and two. I rang up her doctor, who came round at once and diagnosed the usual influenza. “You are to stay in bed until I
allow you to get up' lie told her; "1 don't like the sound of that heart of yours, and it wont get better unless you keep perfectly quiet and still. I should prefer,” he went on, turning to me, “that Mrs. Van Hopper had a trained nurse. You can t possibly lift her. It will only be for a fortnight or so.”
I thought this rather absurd, and protested, but to my surprise she agreed with him. I think she enjoyed the fuss it would create, the sympathy of people, the visits and messages from friends, and the arrival of flowers. Monte Carlo had begun to bore her, and this little illness would make a distraction.
The nurse would give her injections, and a light massage, and she would have a diet. I left her quite happy after the arrival of the nurse, propped up on pillows with a falling temperature, her best bed-jacket round her shoulders and be-ribboned boudoir cap upon her head. Rather ashamed of my light heart, I telephoned her friends, putting off the small party she had arranged for the evening, and went down to the restaurant for lunch, a good half hour before our usual time. I expected the room to be empty, nobody lunched generally before one o'clock. It was empty, except for the table next to ours. This was a contingency for which I was unprepared. I thought he had gone to Sospel. No doubt he was lunching early because he hoped to avoid us at one o'clock. I was already half-way across the room and could not go back. I had not seen him since we disappeared in the lift the day before, for wisely he had avoided dinner in the restaurant, possibly for the same reason that he lunched early now.
It was a situation for which I was ill-trained, I wished I was older, different. I went to our table, looking straight before me, and immediately paid the penalty of gaucherie by knocking over the vase of stif anemones as I unfolded my napkin. The water soaked the cloth, and ran down on to my lap. The waiter was at the other end of the room, nor had he seen. In a second though my neighbour was by my side, dry napkin in hand.
'"You cant sit at a wet tablecloth,” be said brusquely, ‘"it will put you oflF your food. Get out of tbe way.”
He began to mop tbe clotb, while the waiter, seeing tbe disturbance, came swiftly to tbe rescue.
‘1 don't mind,” I said, “it doesn't matter a bit. I'm aU alone,” He said nothing, and tben tbe waiter arrived and whipped away tbe vase and tbe sprawling flowers.
“Leave ibat,” be said suddenly, “and lay another place at my table. Mademoiselle will bave luncheon with me.”
I looked up in confusion. “Ob, no,” I said, “I couldn't possibly.”
“Why not?” be said.
I tried to think of an excuse. I knew be did not want to lunch with me. It was bis form of courtesy. I should ruin bis meal. I determined to be bold and speak tbe truth.
“Please,” I begged, “don't be pobte. It's very kind of you but I shall be quite all right if tbe waiter just wipes tbe cloth.”
“But I'm not being polite,” he insisted, “I would like you to bave luncheon with me. Even if you had not knocked over that vase so clumsily I should bave asked you.” I suppose my face told him my doubt, for be smiled. “You don't bebeve me,” be said, “never mind, come and sit down. We needn't talk to each other unless we feel bke it.”
We sat down, and be gave me the menu, leaving me to choose, and went on with bis hors d^ceume as tbou^ nothing bad happened.
His quality of detachment was pecubar to himself, and I knew that we might continue thus, without speaking, throughout the meal and it would not matter. There would be no sense of strain. He would not ask me questions on history.
“What’s happened to your friend?” he said. I told him about the influenza. “Tm so sorry,” he said, and then, after pausing a moment, “you got my note I suppose. I felt very much ashamed of myself. My manners were atrocious. The only excuse I can make is that I've become boorish through
living alone. Tliafs why its so Mnd of you to lunch with me tO“day.’^
“You weren't rade,” I said, “at least, not the sort of rudeness she would understand. That curiosity of hers— she does not mean to he offensive, hut she does it to everyone. That is, everyone of importance."
“I ought to he flattered then,” he said, “why should she consider me of any importance?” I hesitated a moment before replying.
“I think because of Manderley,” I said.
He did not answer, and I was aware again of that feeling of discomfort, as though I had trespassed on forbidden ground. I wondered why it was that this home of his, known to so many people by hearsay, even to me, should so inevitably silence him, making as it were a barrier between him and others.
We ate for a while without talking, and I thought of a picture post-card I had bought once at a village shop, when on holiday as a child in the west country. It was the painting of a house, crudely done of course and highly coloured, but even those faults could not destroy the symmetry of the building, the wide stone steps before the terrace, the green lawns stretching to the sea. I paid twopence for the painting
—half my weekly pocket money— and then asked the wrinkled shop woman what it was meant to be. She looked astonished at my ignorance.
Thats Manderley,” she said, and I remember coming out of the shop feeling rebuffed, yet hardly wiser than before.
Perhaps it was the memory of this post-card, lost long ago in some forgotten book, that made me sympathise with his defensive attitude. He resented Mrs. Van Hopper and her hke with their intruding questions. Maybe there was something inviolate about Manderley that made it a place apart; it would not bear discussion. I could imagine her tramping through the rooms, perhaps paying sixpence for admission, nppmg the quietude with her sharp, staccato laugh. Our
minds must have run in the same channel for he began to talk about her.
“Your friend' he began, “she is very much older than you. Is she a relation? Have you known her long?” I saw he was still puzzled by us.
“She’s not really a friend,” I told him, “she’s an employer. She’s training me to be a thing called a companion, and she pays me ninety pounds a year.”
“I did not know one could buy companionship,” he said;
“it sounds a primitive idea. Rather like the eastern slave market.”
“I looked up the word companion once in the dictionary,” I admitted, “and it said ‘a companion is a friend of the bosom.’ ”
“You haven’t much in common with her,” he said.
He laughed, looking quite different, younger somehow and less detached. “What do you do it for?” he asked me.
“Ninety pounds is a lot of money to me,” I said.
“Haven’t you any family?”
“No—they’re dead.”
“You have a very lovely and unusual name.”
“My father was a lovely and unusual person.”
“Tell me about him,” he said.
I looked at him over my glass of citronade. It was notr easy to explain my father, and usually I never talked about him. He was my secret property. Preserved for me alone, much as Manderley was preserved for my neighbour. I had no wish to introduce him casually over a table in a Monte Carlo restaurant.
There was a strange air of unreality about that luncheon, and looking back upon it now it is invested for me with a curious glamour. There was I, so much of a schoolgirl still, who only the day before had sat with Mrs. Van Hopper, prim, silent and subdued, and twenty-four hours afterwards my family history was mine no longer, I shared it with a man I did not know. For some reason I felt impelled to speak, because his eyes followed me in sympathy like the Gentleman Unknown.
My shyness fell away from me, loosemng as it did so my reluctant tongue, and out they all came, die little secrets of childhood, the pleasures and the pains. It seemed to me as ithough he understood, from my poor description, something of the vibrant personality that had been my father's, and something too of the love my mother had for him, making it a vital, living force, with a spark of divinity about it, so much that when he died that desperate winter, struck down by pneumonia, she lingered behind him for five short weeks and stayed no more. I remember pausing, a little breathless, a Httle dazed. The restaurant was filled now with people who chatted and laughed to an orchestral background and a clatter of plates, and glancing at the clock above the door I saw that it was two o'clock. We had been sitting there an hour and a half, and the conversation had been mine alone.
I tumbled down into reality, hot-handed and self-conscious, with my face aflame, and began to stammer my apologies. He would not listen to me.
T told you at the beginning of lunch you had a lovely and unusual name," he said. “I shall go further, if you will forgive me, and say that it becomes you as well as it became your father. I've enjoyed this hour with you more than I have enjoyed anything for a very long time. You've taken me out of myself, out of despondency and introspection, both of which have been my devils for a year."
I looked at him and believed he spoke the truth, he seemed less fettered than he had been before, more modem, more human, he was not hemmed in by shadows.
‘'You know," he said, “we've got a bond in common, you and I. We are both alone in the world. Oh, I've got a sister, though we don't see much of each other, and an ancient grandmother whom I pay duty visits to three times a year, but neither of them makes for companionship. I shall have to congratulate Mrs. Van Hopper. You're cheap at ninety pounds a year," You forget, I said, you have a home and I have none."
The moment I spoke I regretted my words, for the secret, inscrutable look came back in his eyes again, and once again
I suffered tlie intolerable discomfort that floods one after lack of tact. He bent his head to light a cigarette, and did not reply immediately.
‘‘An empty house can be as lonely as a full hotel, he said at length. “The trouble is that it is less impersonal.’" He hesitated, and for a moment I thought he was going to talk of Manderley at last, but something held him back, some phobia that struggled to the surface of his mind and won supremacy, for he blew out his match and his flash of confidence at the same time.
“So the friend of the bosom has a holiday?” he said, on a level plane again, an easy camaraderie between us. “What does she propose to do with it?”
I thought of the cobbled square in Monaco, and the house with the narrow window. I could be off there by three o’clock with my sketch-book and pencil, and I told him as much, a little shyly perhaps, like all untalented persons with a pet hobby.
“I’ll drive you there in the car,” he said, and would not listen to protest.
I remembered Mrs. Van Hopper’s warning of the night before about putting myself forward, and was embarrassed that he might think my talk of Monaco was a subterfuge to win a lift. It was so blatantly the type of thing that she would do herself, and I did not want him to bracket us together. I had already risen in importance from my lunch with him, for as we got up from the table the little maitre d’hotel rushed forward to pull away my chair. He bowed and smiled— a total change from his usual attitude of indifference-picked up my handkerchief that had fallen on the floor, and hoped ‘Mademoiselle had enjoyed her lunch Even the page-boy by the swing doors glanced at me with respect. My companion accepted it as natural, of course, he knew nothing of the ill-carved ham of yesterday. I found the change depressing, it made me despise myself. I remembered my father and his scorn of superficial snobbery.
“What are vou thinkins about?” We were walking alnncy
the corridor to the lounge, and looking up I saw his eyes fixed on me in curiosity.
“Has something annoyed you?'' he said.
The attentions of the maltre d'hdtel had opened up a train of thought, and as we drank our coffee I told him about Blaize, the dressmaker. She had been so pleased when Mrs. Van Hopper had bought three frocks, and I, taking her to the lift afterwards, had pictured her working upon them in her own small salon, behind the stuffy litde shop, with a consumptive son wasting upon her sofa. I could see her, with tired eyes, threading needles, and the floor covered with snippets of material.
“Well,” he said smiling, “wasn't your picture true?”
“I don't know,” I said, “I never found out.” And I told him how I had rang the bell for the lift, and as I had done so she had fumbled in her bag and given me a note for a hundred francs. “Here,” she had whispered, her tone intimate and unpleasant, “I want you to accept this small commission in return for bringing your patron to my shop.” When I had refused, scarlet with embarrassment, she had shrugged her shoulders disagreeably. “Just as you hke,” she had said, “But I assure you it’s quite usual. Perhaps you would rather have a frock. Come along to the shop sometime without Madame and I will fix you up without charging you a sou.” Somehow, I don't know why, I had been aware of that sick, unhealthy feeling I had experienced as a cliild the consumptive son faded, and in its stead arose the picture of myself had I been different, pocketing that greasy note with an understanding smile, and perhaps slipping round to Blaize s shop on this my free afternoon and coming away with a frock I had not paid for.
I expected him to laugh. It was a stupid story, I don't know why I told him, but he looked at me thoughtfully as he stirred his coffee.
“I think you've made a big mistake,” he said, after a moment.
“In refusing that hundred francs?” I asked, revolted.
'"No—good heavens, what do you take me for? I think you ve made a mistake in coming here, in joining forces with Mrs. Van Hopper, You are not made for that sort of job. YouYe too young, for one thing, and too soft. Blaize and her commission, that's nothing. The first of many similar incidents from other Blaizes. You will either have to give in, and become a sort of Blaize yourself, or stay as you are and be broken. Who suggested you take on this thing in the first place?” It seemed natural for him to question me, nor did I mind. It was as ihough we had known one another for a long time, and had met again after a lapse of years.
‘Have you ever thought about the future?” he asked me,
“and what this sort of thing will lead to? Supposing Mrs. Van Hopper gets tired of her Tiiend of the bosom,' what then?”
I smiled, and told him that I did not mind very much. There would be other Mrs. Van Hoppers, and I was young, and confident, and strong. But even as he spoke I remembered those advertisements seen often in good class magazines where a friendly society demands succour for young women in reduced circumstances; I thought of the type of boarding-house that answers the advertisement and gives temporary shelter, and then I saw myself, useless sketching replies to stern employment agents. Perhaps I should have accepted Blaize's ten per cent.
“How old are you?” he said, and when I told him he laughed, and got up from his chair. “I know that age, it's a particularly obstinate one, and a thousand bogies won’t make you fear the future. A pity we can't change over. Go upstairs and put your hat on, and I'll have the car brought round.”
As he watched me into the lift I thought of yesterday, Mrs. Van Hopper's chattering tongue, and his cold courtesy. I had ill-judged him, he was neither hard nor sardonic, he was already my friend of many years, the brother I had
and I remember it well. I can see tb© rippled sky, fluffy with cloud, and the white-whipped sea. I can feel again the wind on my face, and hear my laugh, and his that echoed it. It was not the Monte Carlo I had known, or perhaps the truth was that it pleased me better. There was a glamour about it that had not been there before. I must have seen it before with dull eyes. The harbour was a dancing thing, with fluttering paper boats, and the sailors on the quay were jovial, smiling fellows, merry as the wind. We passed the yacht, beloved of Mrs. Van Hopper because of its ducal owner, and snapped our fingers at die glistening brass, and looked at one another and laughed again. I can remember as though I wore it still my comfortable, ill-fitting flannel suit, and how the skirt was lighter than the coat through harder wear. My shabby hat, too broad about the brim, and my low-heeled shoes, fastened with a single strap. A pair of gauntlet gloves clutched in a grubby band. I bad never looked more youthful, I had never felt so old. Mrs. Van Hopper and her influenza did not exist for me. The bridge and the cocktail parties were forgotten, and with them my own humble status.
I was a person of importance, I was grown up at last. That girl, who, tortured by shyness, would stand outside the sitting-room door twisting a handkerchief in her hands, while from within came that babble of confused chatter so unnerving to the intruder—she had gone with the wind that afternoon. She was a poor creature, and I thought of her with scorn if I considered her at all.
The wind was too high for sketching, it tore in cheerful gusts around the comer of my cobbled square, and back to the car we went and drove I know not where. The long road climbed the hills, and the car climbed with it, and we circled in the heights like a bird in the air. How different his car to Mrs. Van Hopper's hireling for the season, a square oldfashioned Daimler that took us to Mentone on placid afternoons, when I, sitting on the little seat with my back to die driver, must crane my neck to see the view. This car had the wings of Mercury I thought, for higher yet we climbed,
and dangerously fast, and the danger pleased me because it was new to me, because I was young.
I remember laughing aloud, and the laugh being carried by the wind away from me; and, looking at him, I realised he laughed no longer, he was once more silent and detached, the man of yesterday wrapped in his secret selE.
I realised, too, that the car could climb no more, we had reached the summit, and below us stretched the way that we had come, precipitous and hollow. He stopped the car, and I could see that the edge of the road bordered a vertical slope that crumbled into vacancy, a fall of perhaps two thousand feet. We got out of the car and looked beneath us. This sobered me at last. I knew that but half the cars length had lain between us and the fall. The sea, like a crinkled chart, spread to the horizon, and lapped the sharp outline of the coast, while the houses were white shells in a rounded grotto, pricked here and there by a great orange sun. We knew another sunlight on our hill, and the silence made it harder, more austere. A change had come upon our afternoon, it was not the thing of gossamer it had been. The wind dropped, and it suddenly grew cold.
When I spoke my voice was far too casual, the silly, nervous voice of someone ill at ease. “Do you know this place?’' I said, “Have you been here before?” He looked down at me without recognition, and I realised wdth a little stab of anxiety that he must have forgotten all about me, perhaps for some considerable time, and that he himself was so lost in the labyrinth of his own unquiet thoughts that I did not exist. He had the face of one who walks in his sleep, and for a wild moment the idea came to me that perhaps he was not normal, not altogether sane. There were people who had trances, I had surely heard of them, and they followed strange laws of which we could know nothing, &ey obeyed the tangled orders of their own sub-conscious minds. Perhaps he was one of them, and here "we were within six feet of death.
“It’s getting late, shall we go home?” I said, and my careless tone, my little ineffectual smile would scarcely have deceived a child.
I laad misjudged him, of course, there was nothing wrong after all, for as soon as I spoke this second time he came clear of his dream and began to apologise. I had gone white, I suppose, and he had noticed it.
‘That was an unforgivable thing for me to do,” he said, and taking my arm he pushed me back towards the car, and we climb^ in again, and he slammed the door. “Don’t be frightened, the turn is far easier than it looks,” he said, and while I, sick and giddy, clung to the seat with both hands, he manoeuvred the car gently, very gently, until it faced the sloping road once more.
“Then you have been here before?” I said to him, my sense of strain departing, as the car crept away down the twisting narrow road.
“Yes,” he said, and then, after pausing a moment, “but not for many years. I wanted to see if it had changed.”
“And has it?” I asked him.
“No,” he said. “No, it has not changed.”
I wondered what had driven him to this retreat into the past, with me an unconscious witness of his mood. Wliat gulf of years stretched between him and that other time, what deed of thought and action, what difference in temperament? I did not want to know. I wished I had not come.
Down the twisting road we went without a check, without a word. A great ridge of clouds stretched above the setting sun, and the air was cold and clean. Suddenly he began to talk about Manderley, He said nothing of his life there, no word about himself, but he told me how the sun set there, on a spring afternoon, leaving a glow upon the headland. The sea would look like slate, cold still from the long winter, and from the terrace you could hear the ripple of the coming tide washing in the little bay. The daffodils were in bloom, stirring in the evening breeze, golden heads cupped upon lean stalks, and however many you might pick there would be no thinning of the ranks, they were massed like an army, shoulder to shoulder. On a bank below the lawns, crocuses were planted, golden, pink, and mauve, hut by this time they would be past their best, dropping and fading, like the pallid
snowdrops. The primrose was more vulgar, a homely pleasant creature who appeared in every cranny like a weed. Too early yet for bluebells, their heads were stiU hidden beneath last year s leaves, but when they came, dwarfing the more humble violet, they choked the very bracken in the woods, and with their colour made a challenge to the sky.
He never would have them in the house, he said. Thrust into vases they became dank and listless, and to see ihem at their best you must walk in the woods in the morning, about twelve o’clock, when the sun was overhead. They had a smoky, rather bitter smell, as though a wild sap ran in their stalks, pungent and juicy. People who plucked bluebells from the woods were vandals, he had forbidden it at Manderley. Sometimes, driving in the country, he had seen bicyclists with huge bunches strapped before them on the handles, the bloom already fading from the dying heads, the ravaged stalks stragghng naked and unclean.
The primrose did not mind it quite so much. Although ^ creature of the wilds it had a leaning towards civilisation, and preened and smiled in a jam-jar in some cottage window without resentment, living quite a week if given water. No wild flowers came in the house at Manderley. He had special cultivated flowers, grown for the house alone, in the walled garden. A rose was one of the few flowers, he said, that looked better picked than growing. A bowl of roses in a drawing-room had a depth of colour and scent they had not possessed in the open. There was something rather blowsy about roses in full bloom, something shallow and raucous, like women with untidy hair. In the house they became mysterious and subtle. He had roses in the house at Manderley for eight months in the year. Did I like syringa? he asked me. There was a tree on the edge of the lawn he could smell from his bedroom window. His sister, who was a hard, rather practical person, used to complain that there were too many scents at Manderley, they made her drunk. Perhaps she was right. He did not care. It was the only form of intoxication that appealed to him. His earliest recollection was
of great brandies of lilac, standing in white jars, and they filled the house with a wistful, poignant smell.
The Htd© pathway down the valley to the bay had clumps of azalea and rhododendron planted to the left of it, and if you wandered down it on a May evening after dinner it was just as though the shrubs had sweated in the air. You could stoop down and pick a fallen petal, crash it between your fingers, and you had there, in the hollow of your hand, the essence of a thousand scents, unbearable and sweet. All from a curled and crumpled petal. And you came out of the valley, heady and rather dazed, to the hard white shingle of the beach and the still water. A curious, perhaps too sudden conAs he spoke the car became one of many once again, dusk had fallen without my noticing it, and we were in the midst of light and sound in the streets of Monte Carlo. The clatter jagged on my nerves, and the lights were far too brilliant, far too yellow. It was a swift, unwelcome anti-climax.
Soon we would come to the hotel, and I felt for my gloves in the pocket of the car. I found them, and my fingers closed upon a book as well, whose slim covers told of poetiy. I peered.to read the title as the car slowed down before the door of the hotel. "You can take it and read it if you like,’ he said, his voice casual and indifferent now that the drive was over, and we were back again, and Manderley was many hundreds of miles distant, I was glad, and held it tightly with my gloves. I felt I wanted some possession of his, now that the day was finished.
"Hop out,”' he said, "I must go and put the car away. I shan't see you in the restaurant this evening as Fm dining out. But thank you for to-day."
I went up the hotel steps alone, with all the despondency of a child whose treat is over. My afternoon had spoilt me for the hours that still remained, and I thought how long they would seem until my bed-time, how empty too my supper all alone. Somehow I could not face the bright enquiries of the nurse upstairs, or the possibilities of Mrs. Van Hop-
per s husky interrogation, so I sat down in the corner of the lounge beliind a pillar and ordered tea.
The waiter appeared bored, seeing me alone there was no need for him to press, and anyway it was that dragging time of day, a few minutes after half-past five, when the normal tea is finished and the hour for drinks remote.
Rather forlorn, more than a little dissatisfied, I leant back was well-worn, well-thumbed, falling open automatically at what must be a much-frequented page.
"I fled Him, down the nights and down the days; I fled Him, down the arches of the years; I fled Him, down the labyrinthine ways Of my own mind; and in the mist of tears I hid from Him, and under running laughter.
Adown Titanic glooms of chasmed fears.
From those strong feet that followed, followed after I felt rather like someone peering through the keyhole of What hound of heaven had driven him to the high hills this afternoon? I thought of his car, with half a length between it and that drop of two thousand feet, and the blank expression on his face. What footsteps echoed in his mind, what whispers, and what memories, and why, of all poems, must he keep this one in the pocket of his car? I wished he were less remote; and I anything but the creature that I was in my shabby coat and skirt, my broad-brimmed schoolgirl hat.
The sulky waiter brought my tea, and while I ate breadand-butter dull as sawdust I thought of the pathway through the valley he had described to me this afternoon, the smell of the azaleas, and the white shingle of the bay. If he loved it all so much why did he seek the superficial froth of Monte Carlo? He had told Mrs. Van Hopper he had made no plans, he came away in rather a hurry. And I pictured him run-
ning down that pathway in the valley with his own hound of heaven at his heels.
I picked up the book again, and this time it opened at the title-page, and I read the dedication. '‘MaX“from Rebecca. May 17th' written in a curious, slanting hand. A little blob of ink marred the white page opposite, as though the writer, in impatience, had shaken her pen to make the ink flow freely. And dien, as it bubbled through the nib, it came a little thick, so that the name Rebecca stood out black and strong, the tall and sloping R dwarfing the other letters.
I shut the book with a snap, and put it away under my gloves; and stretching to a near-by chair, I took up an old copy of Ulllustration and turned the pages. There were some fine photographs of the chateaux of the Loire, and an article as well, I read it carefully, referring to the photographs, but when I finished I knew I had not understood a word. It was not Blois with its thin turrets and its spires that stared up at me from the printed page. It was the face of Mrs. Van Hopper in the restaurant the day before, her small pig's eyes darting to the neighbouring table, her fork, heaped high with ravioH, pausing in mid-air.
‘An appalling tragedy," she was saying, “the papers were fuU of it of course. They say he never talks about it, never mentions her name. She was drowned you know, in a bay near Manderley...
I AM GLAD it cannot happen twice, the fever of first love. For it is a fever, and a burden, too, whatever the poets may say. They are not brave, the days when we are twenty-one. They
are full of little cowardices, little fears without foundation, and one is so easily bruised, so swiftly wounded, one falls to the first barbed word. To-day, wrapped in the complacent armour of approaching middle age, the infinitesimal pricks of day by day brash one but Hghtly and are soon forgotten, but then— how a careless word would linger, becoming a fiery stigma, and how a look, a glance over a shoulder, branded themselves as things eternal. A denial heralded the thrice crowing of a cock, and an insincerity was like the kiss of Judas. The adult mind can He with untroubled conscience and a gay composure, but in those days even a small deception scoured the tongue, lashing one against the stake itself.
What have you been doing this morning?'"' I can hear her now, propped against her pillows, with all the small irritabiHty of the patient who is not really ill, who has lain in bed too long, and I, reaching to the bedside drawer for the pack of cards, would feel the guilty flush form patches on my neck.
‘Tve been playing tennis with the professional,” I told her, the false words bringing me to panic, even as I spoke, for what if the professional himself should come up to the suite, then, that very afternoon, and bursting in upon her complain that I had missed my lesson now for many days?
‘'The trouble is with me laid up like this you havenT got enough to do,” she said, mashing her cigarette in a jar of cleansing cream, and taking the cards in her hand she mixed them in the deft, irritating shuiBBl© of the inveterate player, shaking them in threes, snapping the backs,
‘T don't know what you find to do with yourself all day,” she went on, “you never have any sketches to show me, and when I do ask you to do some shopping for me you forget to buy my Taxol. All I can say is that I hope your tennis will improve, it will be useful to you later on. A poor player is a great bore. Do you still serve underhand?” She flipped the Queen of Spades into the pool, and the dark face stared up at me like Jezebel.
“Yes,” I said, stung by her question, thinking how fust and appropriate her word. It described me well. I was underhand. I had not played tennis with the professional at all,
I liad not once played since she had lain in bed, and that was little over a fortnight now. I wondered why it was I clung to this reserve, and why it was I did not tell her that every morning I drove with de Winter in his car, and lunched with him too, at his table in the restaurant.
‘Tou must come up to the net more, you will never play a good game until you do,” she continued, and I agreed, flinohing at my own hypocrisy, covering her Queen with the weak-chinned Knave of Hearts.
I have forgotten much of Monte Carlo, of those morning drives, of where we went, even our conversation, but I have not forgotten how my fingers trembled, cramming on my hat, and how I ran along the corridor and down the stairs, too impatient to wait for the slow whining of the lift, and so outside brushing the swing doors before the commissionaire could help me.
He would be there, in the driver s seat, reading a paper while he waited, and when he saw me he would smile, and toss it behind him in the back seat, and open the door, saying, 'Well, how is the friend of the bosom this morning, and where does she want to go?” If he had driven round in circles it would not have mattered to me, for I was in that first flushed stage when to climb into the seat beside him, and lean forward to the wind-screen hugging my knees, was almost too much to bear. I was like a little scrubby schoolboy with a passion for a sixth-form prefect, and he kinder, and far more inaccessible.
"There’s a cold wind this morning, you had better put on my coat.”
I remember that, for I was young enough to win happiness in the wearing of his clothes, playing the schoolboy again who carries his hero’s sweater and ties it about his throat choking with pride, and this borrowing of his coat, wearing it around my shoulders for even a few minutes at a time, was a triumph in itself, and made a glow about my morning.
Not for me the languor and the subtlety I had read about in books. The challenge and the chase. The sword-play, the swift glance, the stimulating smile. The art of provocation
was unknown to me, and I would sit with his map upon my lap, the wind blowing my dull, lanky hair, happy in his silence yet eager for his words. Whether he talked or not made Httie difference to my mood. My only enemy was the clock on the dash-board, whose hands would move relentlessly to one o'clock. We drove east, we drove west, amidst the myriad villages that cHng like limpets to the Mediterranean shore, and to-day I remember none of them.
All I remember is the feel of the leather seats, the texture of the map upon my knee, its frayed edges, its worn seams, and how one day, looking at the clock, I thought to myself,
‘‘This moment now, at twenty past eleven, this must never be lost,” and I shut my eyes to make the experience more lasting. When I opened my eyes we were by a bend in the road, and a peasant girl in a black shawl waved to us; I can see her now, her dusty skirt, her gleaming, friendly smile, and in a second we had passed the bend and could see her no more. Already she belonged to the past, she was only a memory.
I wanted to go back again, to recapture the moment that had gone, and then it came to me that if we did it would not be the same, even the sun would be changed in the sky, casting another shadow, and the peasant girl would trudge past us along the road in a different way, not waving this time, perhaps not even seeing us. There was something chilling in the thought, something a little melancholy, and looking at the clock I saw that five more minutes had gone by. Soon we would have reached our time limit, and must return to the hotel.
“If only there could be an invention,” I said impulsively,
“that bottled up a memory, like scent. And it never faded, and it never got stale. And then, when one wanted it, the bottle could be uncorked, and it would be like living the moment all over again.” I looked up at him, to see what he would say. He did not turn to me, he went on watching the road ahead.
“What particular moments in your young life do you wish uncorked?” he said. I could not tell from his voice whether
he was teasing me or not. not sure,” I began, and then blundered on, rather foolishly, not thinking of my words,
‘I'd like to keep this moment and never forget it.”
“Is that meant to be a compliment to the day, or to my driving?” he said, and as he laughed, like a mocking brother, I became silent, overwhelmed suddenly by the great gulf between us, and how his very kindness to me widened it.
I knew then that I would never tell Mrs. Van Hopper about these morning expeditions, for her smile would hurt me as his laugh had done. She would not be angry, nor would she be shocked, she would raise her eyebrows very faintly, as though she did not altogether believe my story, and then with a tolerant shrug of the shoulder she would say, “My dear child, it's extremely sweet and kind of him to take you driving, the only thing is—are you sure it does not bore him dreadfully?” And then she would send me out to buy Taxol, patting me on the shoulder. What degradation lay in being young, I thought, and fell to tearing at my nails.
“I wish,” I said savagely, still mindful of his laugh and throwing discretion to the wind, “I wish I was a woman of about thirty-six dressed in black satin with a string of pearls.”
“You would not be in this car with me if you were,” he said,
“and stop biting your nails, they are ugly enough already.”
“You'll think me impertinent and rude, I dare say,” I went on, “but I would like to know why you ask me to come out in the car, day after day. You are being kind, that's obvious, but why do you choose me for your charity?”
I sat up stiff and straight in my seat with all the poor pomposity of youth,
“I ask you,” he said gravely, “because you are not dressed in black satin, with a string of pearls, nor are you thirty-six.” His face was without expression, I could not tell whether he laughed inwardly or not.
“It's all very well,” I said, “you know everything there is to know about me. There's not much, I admit, because I have not been alive for very long and nothing much has happened to me, except people dying, but you~I know nothing more about you than I did the first day we met.”
‘'And wliat did you know then?’^ he asked.
“Why, that you lived at Manderley and— and that you had lost your wife.” There, I had said it at last, the word that had hovered on my tongue for days. Your wife. It came out with ease, without reluctance, as though the mere mention of her must be the most casual thing in all the world. Your wife. The word lingered in the air once I had uttered it, dancing before me, and because he received it silently, making no comment, the word magnified itself into something heinous and appalling, a forbidden word, unnatural to the tongue. And I could not call it back, it could never be unsaid. Once poems, and die curious slanting R. I felt sick at heart and cold. He would never forgive me, and this would be the end of our friendship.
I remember staring straight in front of me at the windscreen, seeing nothing of the flying road, my ears still tingling with that spoken word. The silence became minutes, and the minutes became miles, and everything is over now, I thought, I shall never drive with him again. To-morrow he will go away. And Mrs. Van Hopper will be up again. She and I will walk along the terrace as we did before. The porter wiU bring down his trunks, I shall catch a glimpse of them in the luggage lift, with new-plastered labels. The bustle and flnality of departure. The sound of the car changing gear as it turned the comer, and then even that sound merging into the common traffic, and being lost, and so absorbed forever, I was so deep in my picture, I even saw the porter pocketing his tip and going hack through the swing-door of the hotel, saying something over his shoulder to the commissionaire, that I did not notice the slowing-down of the car, and it was only when we stopped, drawing up by the side of the road, that I brought myself back to the present once again. He sat motionless, without his hat and with his whit© scarf round his neck, looking more than ever like someone medieval who lived within a frame. He did not belong to the bright landscape, he should be standing on the steps of a gaunt
cathedral, his cloak fixing back, while- a beggar at his feet scrambled for gold coins.
The friend had gone, with his kindliness and his easy camaraderie, and the brother too, who had mocked me for nibbling at my nails. This man was a stranger. I wondered why I was sitting beside him in the car.
Then he turned to me and spoke. "A little while ago yon talked about an invention,'^ he said, "some scheme for capturing a memory. You would hke, you told me, at a chosen moment to live the past again. I m afraid I think rather differently from you. All memories are bitter, and I prefer to ignore them. Something happened a year ago that altered my whole life, and I want to forget every phase of my existence up to that time. Those days are finished. They are blotted out. I must begin living all over again. The first day we met, your Mrs. Van Hopper asked me why I came to Monte Carlo. It put a stopper on those memories you would like to resurrect. It does not always work, of course, sometimes the scent is too strong for the bottle, and too strong for me. And then the devil in one, like a furtive Peeping Tom, tries to draw the cork. I did that in the first drive we took together. When we climbed the hills and looked down over the precipice. I was there some years ago, with my wife. You asked me if it was stiU the same, if it had changed at all. It was just the same, but— I was thankful to realise— oddly impersonal. There was no suggestion of the other time. She and I had left no recoid. It may have been because you were with me. You have blotted out the past for me, you know, far more effectively than all the bright lights of Monte Carlo, But for you I should have left long ago, gone on to Italy, and Greece, and further still perhaps. You have spared me ail those wanderings. Damn your puritanical little tight-lipped speech to me. Damn your idea of my kindness and my charity. I ask you to come with me because I want you and your company, and if you don’t believe me you can leave the car now and find your own way home. Go on, open the door, and get out,” I sat still, my hands in my lap, not knowing whether he meant it or not.
''Well,” he said, "what are you going to do about itF’ Had I been a year or two younger I think I should have cried. Children s tears are very near ldie surface, and come at the first crisis. As it was I felt them prick behind my eyes, felt the ready colour flood my face, and catching a sudden glimpse of myself in the glass above the wind-screen saw in full the sorry spectacle that I made, with troubled eyes and scarlet cheeks, lank hair flapping rnider broad felt hat.
"I want to go home,” I said, my voice perilously near to trembling, and without a word he started up the engine, let in the clutch, and turned the car round the way that we had come.
Swiftly we covered the ground, far too swiftly, I thought, far too easily, and the callous countryside watched us with indifference. We came to the bend in the road that I had wished to imprison as a memory, and the peasant girl was gone, and the colour was flat, and it was no more after all than any bend in any road passed by a hundred motorists. The glamour of it had gone with my happy mood, and at the thought of it my frozen face quivered into feeling, my adult pride was lost, and those despicable tears rejoicing at their conquest welled into my eyes and strayed upon my cheeks.
I could not check them, for they came unbidden, and had I reached in my pocket for a handkerchief he would have seen. I must let them fall untouched, and suffer the bitter salt upon my lips, plumbing the depths of humiliation. Whether he had turned his head to look at me I do not know, for I watched the road ahead with blurred and steady stare, but suddenly he put out his hand and took hold of mine, and kissed it, still saying nothing, and then he threw his handkerchief on my lap, which I was too ashamed to touch.
I thought of all those heroines of fiction who looked pretty when they cried, and what a contrast I must make with blotched and swollen face, and red rims to my eyes. It was a dismal finish to my morning, and the day that stretched ahead of me was long. I had to lunch with Mrs. Van Hopper m her room, because the nurse was going out, and afterwards she would make me play bezique with all the tireless
energy of the convalescent. I knew I should stifle in that room. There was something sordid about the tumbled sheets, the sprawling blankets and the thumped pfflows, and that bed-side table dusty with powder, spilt scent, and melting liquid rouge. Her bed woxild be littered with the separated sheets of the daily papers folded anyhow, while French novels witli curHng edges and the covers tom kept company with American magazines. The mashed stubs of cigarettes lay everywhere, in cleansing cream, in a dish of grapes, and on the floor beneath the bed. Visitors were lavish with their flowers, and the vases stood cheek by jowl in any fashion, hot-house exotics crammed beside mimosa, while a great beribboned basket crowned them all, with tier upon tier of crystallised fruit. Later her friends would come in for a drink, which I must mix for them, hating my task, shy and ill-atease in my comer hemmed in by their parrot chatter, and I would be a whipping boy again, blushing for her when, excited by her little crowd, she must sit up in bed and talk too loudly, laugh too long, reach to the portable gramophone and start a record, shrugging her large shoulders to the tune. I preferred her irritable and snappy, her hair done up in pins, scolding me for forgetting her Taxol. All this awaited me in the smte, while he, once he had left me at tlie hotel, would go away somewhere alone, towards the sea perhaps, feel the wind on his cheek, follow the sun; and it might happen that he would lose himself in those memories that I knew nothing of, that I could not share; he would wander down the years that were gone.
The gulf that lay between us was wider now than it had ever been, and he stood away from me, with his back turned, on the further shore. I felt young and small and very much alone, and now, in spite of my pride, I found his handkerchief and blew my nose, throwing my drab appearance to the winds. It could never matter.
'"To hell with this,” he said suddenly, as though angry, as though bored, and he pulled me beside him, and put his arm round my shoulder, still looking straight ahead of him, his Tight hand on the wheel. He drove, I remember, even
faster tiiaii before. ‘1 suppose you are young enougb to be my daughter, and I don^’t know how to deal with you,” he said. The road narrowed then to a comer, and he had to swerve to avoid a dog. I thought he would release me, but he went on holding me beside him, and when the comer was passed, and the road came straight again, he did not let me go. '‘You can forget all I said to you this morning,” he said,
“that^’s all finished and done with. DonY lef s ever think of it again. My family always call me Maxim, Td hke you to do the same. YouVe been formal with me long enough.” He felt for the brim of my hat, and^took hold of it, throwing it over his shoulder to the back seat, and then bent down and kissed the top of my head. “Promise me you will never wear black satin,” he said. I smiled then, and he laughed back at me, and the morning was gay again, the morning was a shining thing. Mrs. Van Hopper and the afternoon did not matter a flip of the finger. It would pass so quickly, and there would be to-night, and another day to-morrow. I was cocksure, jubilant, at that moment I almost had the courage to claim equality. I saw myself strolling into Mrs. Van Hopper s bedroom rather late for my bezique, and when questioned by her yawning carelessly, saying, “I forgot the time. Tve been lunching with Maxim.”
I was still child enough to consider a Christian name like a plume in the hat, though from the very first he had called me by mine. The morning, for all its shadowed moments, had promoted me to a new level of friendship, I did not lag so far behind as I had thought. He had kissed me too, a natural business, comforting and quiet. Not dramatic as in books. Not embarrassing. It seemed to bring about an ease in our relationship, it made everything more simple. The gulf between us had been bridged after all. I was to call him Maxim. And that afternoon playing bezique with Mrs. Van Hopper was not so tedious as it might have been, though my courage failed me and I said nothing of my morning. For when, gathering her cards together at the end, and reaching for the box, she said casually, “TeU me, is Max de Winter still in the hotel?” I hesitated a moment, like a diver on
the brink, then lost my nerve and my tutored self-possession, saying, “Yes, I believe so— be comes into the restaurant for his meals.”
Someone has told her, I thought, someone has seen us together, the tennis professional has complained, the manager has sent a note, and I waited for her attack. But she went on putting the cards back into the box, yawning a little, while I straightened the tumbled bed. I gave her the bowl of powder, the rouge compact, and ihe lip-stick, and she put away the cards and took up the hand glass from the table by her side.
“Attractive creature,” she said, hut queer-tempered I should think, difficult to know. I thought he might have made some gesture of asking one to Manderley that day in the lounge, but he was very close.”
I said nothing. I watched her pick up the hp-stick and outline a bow upon her bard mouth, “I never saw her,” she said, holding the glass away to see the effect, ‘hut I believe she was very lovely. Exquisitely turned out, and brilliant in every way. They used to give tremendous parties at Manderley. It was all very sudden and tragic, and I believe he adored her. I need the darker shade of powder with this brilliant red, my dear, fetch it will you, and put this box back in the drawer?”
And we were busy then with powder, scent, and rouge, until the beU rang and her visitors came in. I handed them their drinks dully, saying httle; I changed the records on the gramophone, I threw away the stubs of cigarettes.
“Been doing any sketching lately, Httle lady?” The forced heartiness of an old banker, his monocle dangling on a string, and my bright smile of insincerity: “No, not very lately; will you have another cigarette?”
It was not I that answered, I was not there at all. I was following a phantom in my mind, whose shadowy form had taken shape at last. Her features were blurred, her colouring indistinct, the setting of her eyes and the texture of her hair were still uncertain, still to be revealed.
She had beauty that endured, and a smile that was not forgotten. Somewhere her voice still lingered, and the memory of her words. There were places she had visited, and things
that she had touched. Perhaps in cupboards there were clothes that she had worn, with the scent about them still. In my bedroom, under my pillow, I had a book that she had taken in her hands, and I could see her turning to that first white page, smiling as she wrote, and shaking the bent nib. Max from Rebecca. It must have been his birthday, and she had put it amongst her other presents on the breakfast table. And they had laughed together as he tore ofE the paper and the string. She leant, perhaps over his shoulder, while he read. Max. She called him Max. It was famiHar, gay, and easy on the tongue. The family could call him Maxim if they liked. Grandmothers and aunts. And people like myself, quiet and dull and youthful, who did not matter. Max was her choice, the word was her possession, she had written it with so great hand, stabbing the white paper, the symbol of herself, so certain, so assured.
How many times she must have written to him thus, in how many varied moods.
Little notes, scrawled on half-sheets of paper, and letters, when he was away, page after page, intimate, their news. Her voice, echomg through the house, and down the garAnd I had to call him Maxim.
PACKING UP. The nagging worry of departure. Lost keys, unwritten labels, tissue paper lying on the floor. I hate it all. Even now, when I have done so much of it, when I Hve, as the saying goes, in my boxes. Even to-day, when shutting
drawers and flinging wide a hotel wardrobe, or the impersonal shelves of a furnished villa, is a methodical matter of routine, I am aware of sadness, of a sense of loss. Here, I say, we have lived, we have been happy. This has been ours, however brief the time. Though two nights only have Been spent beneath a roof, yet w© leave something of ourselves behind. Nothing material, not a hair-pin on a dressing-table, not an empty bottle of aspirin tablets, not a handkercliief beneath a pillow, but something indefinable, a moment of our lives, a thought, a mood.
This house sheltered us, w© spoke, w© loved within those walls. That was yesterday. To-day w© pass on, we see it no more, and we are different, changed in some mfinitesimal way. We can never be quite the same again. Even stopping for luncheon at a way-side inn, and going to a dark, unfamiliar room to wash my hands, the handle of the door unknown to me, the wall-paper peeling in strips, a funny litd© cracked mirror above the basin, for this moment, it is mine, it belongs to me. We know one another. This is the present. There is no past and no future. Her© I am washing my hands and the cracked mirror shows me to myself, suspended as it were, in time; this is me, this moment will not pass.
And then I open the door and go to the dining-room, where he is sitting waiting for me at a table, and I think how in that moment I have aged, and passed on, how I have advanced one step towards an unknown destiny.
We smile, we choose our lunch, w© speak of this and that, but— I say to myself— I am not she who left him five minutes ago. She has stayed behind. I am another woman, older, more mature....
I saw in a paper the other day that the hotel Cdte d'Azur at Monte Carlo had gone to new management, and had a different name. The rooms had been re-decorated, and the whole interior changed. Perhaps Mrs. Van Hopper's suite on the first floor exists no more. Perhaps there is no trace of the small bedroom that was mine. I knew I should never go back, that day I knelt on the floor and fumbled with the awkward catch of her trunk.
The episode was finished, with the snapping of the lock.
I glanced out of ihe window, and it was like turning the page of a photograph album. Those roof tops and that sea were mine no more. They belonged to yesterday, to the past. The rooms already wore an empty air, stripped of our possessions, and there was something hungry about the suite, as though it wished us gone, and the new arrivals, who would come to-morrow, in our place. The heavy luggage stood ready strapped and locked in the corridor outside. The smaller stuff would be finished later. Waste-paper baskets groaned under litter. All her half-empty medicine bottles and discarded facecream jars, with torn-up bills and letters. Drawers in tables gaped, the bureau was stripped bare.
She had flung a letter at me the morning before, as I poured out her coffee at breakfast. “Helen is sailing for New York on Saturday. Little Nancy has a threatened appendix, and they Ve cabled her to go home. Thaf s decided me. We re going, too. Tm tired to death of Europe, and we can come back m the early fall. How d^ou like the idea of seeing New York?"
The thought was worse than prison. Something of my misery must have shovm in my face, for at first she looked astonished, then annoyed.
“What an odd, unsatisfactory child you are. I can^t make you out. Don't you realise that at home girls in your position without any money can have the grandest fun? Plenty of boys and excitement. All in your own class. You can have your own little set of friends, and needn't be at my heck and call as much as you are here. I thought you didn't care for Monte?"
“I've got used to it," I said lamely, wretchedly, my mind a conflict.
“Well, you'll just have to get used to New York, that's all. We're going to catch that boat of Helen's, and it means seeing about our passage at once. Go down to the reception office right away, and make that young clerk show some sign of eflficiency. Your day will be so full that you won't have time to have any pangs about leaving Monte!" She laughed
disagreeably, squashing her cigarette in the butter, and went to the telephone to ring up all her friends.
I could not face tire office right away. I went into the bathroom and locked the door, and sat down on the cork mat, my head in my hands. It had happened at last, the business of going away. It was all over. To-morrow evening I should be in the train, holding her jewel case and her mg, like a maid, and she in that monstrous new hat with the single quill, dwarfed in her fur-coat, sitting opposite me in the wagon-lit We would wash and clean our teeth in that stuffy little compartment with the rattling doors, the splashed basin, the damp towel, the soap with a single hair on it, the carafe half-filled with water, the inevitable notice on the wall '^Sous le lamho se trouve une vase^ while every rattle, every throb and jerk of the screaming train would teU me that the miles carried me away from him, sitting alone in the restaurant of ih© hotel, thinking.
I should say good-bye to him in the lounge, perhaps, before we left A furtive, scrambled farewell, because of her, and there would be a pause, and a smile, and words like “Yes, of course, do write,” and “Fve never thanked you properly for being so kind,” and “You must forward those snapshots.”
“What about your address?” “Well, TU have to let you know.” And he would Hght a cigarette casually, asking a passing waiter for a light, while I thought, “Four and a hah more minutes to go. I shall never see him again.”
Because I was going, because it was over, there would suddenly b© nothing more to say, w© would be strangers, meeting for the last and only time, while my mind clamoured painfully, crying, “I love you so much. Fm terribly unhappy. This has never come to me before, and never will again.” My face would b© set in a prim, conventional smile, my voice would be saying, “Look at that funny old man over there, I wonder who he is, he must be new here.” And we would waste the last moments laughing at a stranger, because we were already strangers to one another. “I hope the snapshots come out well,” repeating oneself in desperation, and he
“Yes, that one of the square ought to be good, the light was just right' Having both of us gone into all that at the time, having agreed upon it, and anyway I would not care if the result was fogged and black, because this was the last moment, the final good-bye had been attained.
""Well," my dreadful smile stretching across my face,
"thanks most awfully once again, it's been so ripping.. ' using words I had never used before. Ripping: what did it mean?— C-od knows, I did not care; it was the sort of word that schoolgirls had for hockey, wildly inappropriate to those past weeks of misery and exultation. Then the doors of the lift would open upon Mrs. Van Hopper and I would cross the lounge to meet her, and he would stroll back again to his corner and pick up a paper.
Sitting there, ridiculously, on the cork mat of the bathroom floor I lived it all, and our journey too, and our arrival in New York. The shrill voice of Helen, a narrower edition of her mother, and Nancy, her horrid Httle child. The college boys that Mrs. Van Hopper would have me know, and the young bank clerks, suitable to my station. "Let's make Wednesday night a date." "D'you like hot music?" Snubnosed boys, with shiny faces. Having to be polite. And wanting to be alone with my own thoughts as I was now, locked behind the bathroom door....
She came and rattled on the door. "What are you doing?"
"All right— I'm sorry. I'm coming now," and I made a pretence of turning on the tap, of bustling about and folding a towel on a rail.
She glanced at me curiously as I opened the door. "What a time you've been. You can't afford to dream this morning, you know, there's too much to be done."
He would go back to Manderley, of course, in a few weeks, I felt certain of that. There would be a great pile of letters waiting for him in the hall, and min© amongst them, scribbled on the boat A forced letter, trying to amuse, describing my fellow passengers. It would lie about inside his blotter, and he would answer it weeks later, one Sunday morning in a hurry, before lunch, having come across it when
Tie paid some bills. And then no more. Nothing until the final degradation of the Christmas card. Manderiey itself perhaps, against a frosted background. The message printed, saying
"'A happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year from Maximilian de Winter.^ Gold lettering. But to be kind he would have run his pen tlirough tihe printed name and written in ink underneath ‘'from Maxim,'^ as a sort of sop, and if there was space, a message, 1 hope you are enjoying New York."' A lick of the envelope, a stamp, and tossed in a pile of a hundred others.
“Ifs too had you ax© leaving to-morrow," said the reception clerk, telephone in hand, ‘‘the Ballet starts next week, you know. Does Mrs. Van Hopper know?" I dragged myself back from Christmas at Manderiey to the realities of the wagon-lit.
Mrs. Van Hopper lunched in the restaurant for the first time since her influenza, and I had a pain in the pit of my stomach as I followed her into the room. He had gone to Cannes for the day, that much I knew, for he had warned me the day before, hut I kept thinking the waiter might commit an indiscretion and say: “Will Mademoiselle be dining with Monsieur to-night as usual?" I felt a little sick whenever he came near the table, but he said nothing.
The day was spent in packing, and in the evening people cam© to say good-bye. We dined in the sitting-room, and she went to bed directly afterwards. Still I had not seen him. I went down to the lounge about half-past nine on the pretext of getting luggage labels and he was not there. The odious reception clerk smiled when he saw me. “If you are looking for Mr. d© Winter we had a message from Cannes to say he would not be back before midnight.”
“I want a packet of luggage labels," I said, but I saw by his eye that he was not deceived. So there would be no last evening after all. The hour I had looked forward to all day must be spent by myself alone, in my own bedroom, gazing at my Revelation suit-case and the stout hold-all. Perhaps it was just as well, for I should have made a poor companion, and he must have read my face.
I know I cried that night, bitter youthful tears that could not come from me to-day. That kind of crying, deep into a pillow, does not happen after we are twenty-one. The throbbing head, the swollen eyes, the tight, contracted throat. And the wild anxiety in the morning to hid© all traces from the world, sponging with cold water, dabbing eau-de-Cologne, the furtive dash of powder that is significant in itself. The panic, too, that one might cry again, the tears swelling without control, and a fatal trembling of the mouth lead one to disaster. I remember opening wide my window and leaning out, hoping the fresh morning air would blow away the telltale pink under the powder, and the sun had never seemed so bright, nor the day so full of promise. Monte Carlo was suddenly full of kindliness and charm, the one place in the world that held sincerity. I loved it. AflEection overwhelmed me. I wanted to live there all my life. And I was leaving it to-day. This is the last time I brush my hair before the looking-glass, the last time I shall clean my teeth into the basm. Never again sleep in that bed. Never.more turn off the switch of that electric light. There I was, padding about in a dressing-gown, making a slough of sentiment out of a commonplace hotel bedroom,
"You haven’t started a cold, have youF she said at breakfast.
"No," I told her, "I don’t think so," clutching at a straw, for this might serve as an excuse later, if I was over-pink about the eyes.
"I hat© hanging about once everything is packed," she grumbled; "we ought to have decided on the earlier train. W© could get it if we made the effort, and then have longer in Paris. Wire Helen not to meet us, but arrange another rendezvous. I wond©r"-'she glanced at her watch— "I suppose they could change the reservations. Anyway it’s worth trying. Go down to the office and see."
"Yes," I said, a dummy to her moods, going into my bedroom and flinging off my dressing-gown, fastening my inevitable flannel skirt and stretcbing my home-made jumper over my head. My indifference to her turned to hatred. This
was the end then, even my morning must be taben from me. No last half-hour on the terrace, not even ten minutes perhaps to say good-bye. Because she had finished breakfast earlier than she expected, because she was bored. Well then, I would fiing away restraint and modesty, I would not be proud any more. I slammed the door of the sitting-room and ran along the passage. I did not wait for die lift, I climbed the stairs, three at a time, up to the third floor. I knew the number of his room, 148, and I hammered at the door, very flushed in the face and breathless.
'Come in,' he shouted, and I opened the door, repenting already, my nerve failing me, for perhaps he had only just woken up, having been late last night, and would be still in bed, tousled in the head and irritable.
He was shaving by the open window, a camel-hair jacket over his pyjamas, and I in my flannel suit and heavy shoes felt clumsy and overdressed. I was merely foolish, when I had felt myself dramatic.
‘'What do you want,” he said, “is something the matter?”
“IVe come to say good-bye,” I said, “we’re going this morning.”
He stared at me, then put his razor down on the washstand. “Shut the door,” he said.
I closed it behind me, and stood there, rather self-conscious, my hands hanging by my sides. “What on earth are you talking about?” he asked.
“It s true, we’re leaving to-day. We were going by the later train, and now she wants to catch the earlier one, and I was afraid I shouldn’t see you again. I felt I must see you before I left, to thank you.”
They tumbled out, the idiotic words, just as I had imagined them. I was stiff and awkward, in a moment I should say he had been ripping.
“Why didn’t you tell me about this before?” he said.
She only decided yesterday. It was all done in a hurry. Her daughter sails for New York on Saturday, and we are going with her. Were joining her in Paris, and going through to Cherbourg.”
“She’s taking you with her to New York?’’
“Yes, and I don’t want to go. I shah hate it; I shall he miserable.”
“Why in heaven’s name go with her, then?”
“I have to, you know that. I work for a salary. I can’t afford to leave her.” He picked up his razor again, and took the soap off his face. ‘‘Sit down,” he said, “I shan’t be long. rU dress in the bathroom, and be ready in five minutes,” He took his clothes off the chair and threw them on the bathroom floor, and went inside, slamming the door. I sat down on the bed and began biting my nails. The situation was unreal, and I felt like a lay-figure. I wondered what he was thinking, what he was going to do, I glanced round the room, and it was the room of any man, untidy and impersonal. Lots of shoes, more than were ever needed, and strings of ties. The dressing-table was bare, except for a large bottle of hair-wash and a pair of ivory hair-brushes. No photographs. No snapshots. Nothing like that. Instinctively I had looked for them, thinking thare would be one photograph at least beside his bed, or in the middle of the mantelpiece. One large one, in a leather frame. There were only books though, and a box of cigarettes.
He was ready, as he had promised, in five minutes. “Come down to the terrace while I eat my breakfast,” he said.
I looked at my watch, “I haven’t time,” I told him. “I ought to be in the oflBce now, changing the reservations.”
“Never mind about that. I’ve got to talk to you,” he said.
We walked down the corridor and he rang for the lift. He can’t realise, I thought, that the early train leaves in about an hour and a half. Mrs. Van Hopper will ring up the office in a moment, and ask if I am there. We went down in the lift, not talking, and so out to the terrace, where the tables were laid for breakfast.
“What are you going to have?” he said.
“I’ve had mine already,” I told him, “and I can only stay fom- minutes anyway.”
“Bring me coffee, a boiled egg, toast, marmalade, and a
tangerine’ lie said to the waiter. And he took an emery board out of his pocket and began filing his nails.
“So Mrs. Van Hopper has had enough of Monte Carlo’ he said, “and now she wants to go home. So do I. She to New York and I to Manderley. Which would you prefer? You can take )^our choice.”
“Don’t make a joke about it, it’s unfair,” I said, “and I think I had better see about those tickets, and say good-bye now.”
“If you think I’m one of the people who try to be funny at breakfast you’re wrong,” he said. “I’m invariably ill-tempered in the early morning. I repeat to you, the choice is open to you. Either you go to America with Mrs. Van Hopper or you come home to Manderley with me.”
“Do you mean you want a secretary or something?”
“No, I’m asking you to marry me, you little fool.”
The waiter came with the breakfast, and I sat with my hands in my lap, watching while he put down the pot of coffee and the jug of milk.
“You don’t understand,” I said, when the waiter had gone,
“I’m not the sort of person men marry.”
“What the devil do you mean?” he said, staring at me, laying down his spoon.
I watched a fly settle on the marmalade, and he brushed it away impatiently.
“I’m not sure,” I said slowly. “I don’t think I know how to explain. I don’t belong to your sort of world, for one thing.”
“What is my world?”
“Well— Manderley. You know what I mean.”
He picked up his spoon again and helped himself to marmalade.
You are almost as ignorant as Mrs. Van Hopper, and just as unintelligent. What do you know of Manderley? Ym the person to judge that, whether you would belong there or riot. You think I ask you this on the spur of the moment, don’t you? Because you say you don’t want to go to New York. You think I ask you to marry me for the same reason
you believed I drove you about in the car, yes, and gave you dinner that first evening. To be kind. Don't you?"
‘"Yes," I said.
“One day," he went on, spreading his toast thick, “you may realise that philanthropy is not my strongest quality. At the moment I don't think you realise anything at aU. You haven't answered my question. Are you going to marry me?"
I don't believe, even in my fiercest moments, I had considered this possibihty. I had once, when driving with him and we had been silent for many miles, started a rambling story in my head about him being very iU, delirious I think, and sending for me and I having to nurse him. I had reached the point in my story where I was putting eau-de-Cologne on his head when we arrived at the hotel, and so it finished there. And another time I had imagined living in a lodge in the grounds of Manderley, and how he would visit me sometimes, and sit in front of the fire. This sudden talk of marriage bewildered me, even shocked me, I think. It was as though the King asked one. It did not ring true. And he went on eating hds marmalade as though everything were natural. In books men knelt to women, and it would be moonlight. Not at breakfast, not Hke this.
“My suggestion doesn't seem to have gone too well,” he said. “I'm sorry. I rather thought you loved me. A fine blow to my conceit.”
“I do love you,” I said. “I love you dreadfully. You've made me very unhappy and I've been crying aU night because I thought I should never see you again."
When I said this I remember he laughed, and stretched his hand to me across the breakfast table. “Bless you for that,” he said; “one day, when you reach that exalted age of thirtyfive which you told me was your ambition, I'll remind you of this moment. And you won't believe me. It's a pity you have to grow up.”
I was ashamed already, and angry with him for laughing. So women did not make those confessions to men. I had a lot to learn.
“So that's settled, isn't it?" he said, going on with his toast
and marmalade; 'Instead of -being companion to Mrs. Van Hopper you become mine, and your duties will b© almost exactly tbe same. I also like new library books, and flowers in the drawing-room, and bezique after dinner. And someone to pour out my tea. Tlie only difference is that I don’t take Taxol, I prefer Eno’s, and you must never let me run out of my particular brand of tooth-paste.”
I drummed with my fingers on the table, uncertain of myself and of him. Was he still laughing at me, was it all a joke? He looked up, and saw the anxiety on my face, ‘Tm being rather a brute to you, aren’t I?” he said; "this isn’t your idea of a proposal. W© ought to be in a conservatory, you in a white frock with a rose in your hand, and a violin playing a waltz in the distance. And I should make violent love to you behind a palm tree. You would feel then you were getting your money’s worth. Poor darling, what a shame. Never mind. 111 take you to Venice for our honeymoon and well hold hands in the gondola. But we won’t stay too long, because I want to show you Manderley.”
He wanted to show me Manderley.... And suddenly I realised that it would all happen, I would he his wife, we would walk in the garden together, we would stroll down that path in the valley to the shingle beach. I knew how I would stand on the steps after breakfast, looking at the day, throwing crumbs to the birds, and later wander out in a shady hat with long scissors in my hand, and cut flowers for the house. I knew now why I had bought that picture post-card as a child, it was a premonition, a blank step into the future.
He wanted to show me Manderley.... My mind ran riot then, figures came before me and picture after picture— and all the while he ate his tangerine, giving me a piece now and then, and watching me. We would be in a crowd of people, and h© would say, "I don’t think you have met my wife.” Mrs. de Winter. I would be Mrs. de Winter. I considered my name, and the signature on cheques, to tradesmen, and in letters asking people to dinner. I heard myself talking on the telephone: “Why not come down to Manderley next week-end?” People, always a throng of people. “Oh, but she’s simply
cHarming, you must meet her—” This about me, a whisper on the fringe of a crowd, and I would turn away, pretending I had not heard.
Going down to the lodge with a basket on my arm, grapes and peaches for the old lady who was sick. Her hands stretched out to me, ‘‘The Lord bless you. Madam, for being so good,’"' and my saying “Just send up to the house for anything you want.’' Mrs. de Winter. I would he Mrs. de Winter. I saw the polished table in the dining-room, and the long candles. Maxim sitting at the end. A party of twenty-four. I had a flower in my hair. Everyone looked towards me, holding up his glass. “We must drink the health of the bride^ and Maxim saying afterwards, “I have never seen you look so lovely.” Great cool rooms, filled with flowers. My bedroom, with a fire in the winter, someone knocking at the door. And a woman comes in, smiling, she is Maxim’s sister, and she is saying, “It’s really wonderful how happy you have made him, everyone is so pleased, you are such a success.” Mrs. de Winter. I would be Mrs. de Winter.
“The rest of the tangerine is sour, I shouldn’t eat it,” he said, and I stared at him, the words going slowly to my head, then looked down at the fruit on my plate. The quarter was hard and pale. He was right. The tangerine was very soxir. I had a sharp, bitter taste in my mouth, and I had only just noticed it.
“Am I going to break the news to Mrs. Van Hopper or are you?” he said.
He was folding up his napkin, pushing back his plate, and I wondered how it was he spoke so casually, as though the matter was of little consequence, a mere adjustment of plans. Whereas to me it was a bombshell, exploding in a thousand fragments.
“You tell her,” I said, “she’ll be so angry.”
We got up from the table, I excited and flushed, trembling already in anticipation. I wondered if he would tell the waiter, take my arm smilingly and say, “You must congratulate us, Mademoiselle and I are going to be married.” And all the other waiters would hear, would bow to us, would smile, and
o we would pass into the lounge, a wav© of excitement following us, a flutter of expectation. But he said nothing. He left the terrace without a word, and I followed him to the lift. We passed the reception desk and no on© even looked at us. The clerk was busy with a sheaf of papers, he was talking over his shoulder to his junior. He does not know, I thought, that I am going to be Mrs. de Winter. I am going to live at Manderley. Manderley will belong to me. We went up in the hft to the first floor, and so along the passage. He took my hand and swung it as we went along. “Does forty-two seem very old to youF he said.
“Oh, no,” I told him, quickly, too eagerly perhaps. “I don t hke young men.”
“You V© never known any,” he said.
We came to the door of the suite. “I think I had better deal with this alone,” he said; “tell me something—do you mind how soon you marry me? You donT want a trousseau, do you, or any of that nonsense? Because the whole thing can be so easily arranged in a few days. Over a desk, with a licence, and then off in the car to Venice or anywhere you fancy.”
“Not in a church?” I asked. “Not in white, with bridesmaids, and bells, and choir hoys? What about your relations, and all your friends?”
“You forget,” he said, “I had that sort of wedding before.”
We went on standing in front of the door of the suite, and I noticed that the daily paper was still thrust through the letter-box. We had been too busy to read it at breakfast.
“Well?” he said, “what about it?”
“Of course,” I answered, “I was thinking for the moment we would he married at home. Naturally I don't expect a church, or people, or anything like that.”
And I smiled at him. I made a cheerful face. “Won't it be fun?” I said.
He had turned to the door though, and opened it, and we were inside the suite in the little entrance passage.
Is that youF' called Mrs- Van Hopper from the sittingroom. “What in the name of Mike have you been doing? I've rung the ofiice three times and they said they hadn't seen you,”
l
I was seized with a sudden desire to laugh, to cry, to do hath, and I had a pain, too, at the pit of my stomach. I wished, for one wild moment, that none of this had happened, that I was alone somewhere, going for a walk, and whisthng.
‘1 m afraid it"s all my fault,"' he said, going into the sittingroom, shutting the door behind him, and I heard her exclamation of surprise.
Then I went into my bedroom and sat down by the open window. It was like waiting in the ante-room at a doctor's. I ought to turn over the pages of a magazine, look at photographs that did not matter and read articles I should never remember, until the nurse came, bright and efficient, all humanity washed away by years of disinfectant: ‘Tt's all right, the operation was quite successful. There is no need to worry at all. I should go home and have some sleep."
The walls of the suite were thick, I could hear no hum of voices. I wondered what he was saying to her, how he phrased his words. Perhaps he said, “I feU in love with her, you know, the very first time we met. We've been seeing one another every day," And she in answer, “Why, Mr. de Winter, it's quite the most romantic thing I've ever heard." Romantic, that was the word I had tried to remember coming up in the lift. Yes, of course. Romantic. That was what people would say. It was all very sudden and romantic. They suddenly decided to get married and there it was. Such an adventure. I smiled to myself as I hugged my knees on the window seat, thinking how wonderful it was, how happy I was going to be. I was to marry the man I loved. I was to be Mrs. de Winter. It was foolish to go on having that pain in the pit of my stomach when I was so happy. Nerves of course. Waiting like this; the doctor's ante-room. It would have been better, after all, more natural surely to have gone into the sitting-room hand in hand, laughing, smiling at one another and for him to say: “We're going to he married, we're very much in love."
In love. He had not said anything yet about being in love. No time perhaps. It was all so hurried at the breakfast table. Marmalade, and coffee, and that tangerine. No time. The
tangerine was very bitter. No, be had not said anything about being in love. Just that we wotild be married. Short and definite, very original. Original proposals were much better. More genuine. Not like other people. Not like younger men who talked nonsense probably, not meaning half they said. Not Hke younger men being very incoherent, very passionate, swearing impossibilities. Not hke him the first time, asking Rebecca.... I must not think of that. Put it away. A thought forbidden, prompted by demons. Get thee behind me, Satan.
I must never think about that, never, never, never. He loves me, he wants to show me Manderley. Would they ever have done with their talking, would they ever call me into the room?
There was the hook of poems lying beside my bed. He had forgotten he bad ever lent them to me. They could not mean much to him then. "Go on,” whispered the demon, "open the title-page, thafs what you want to do, isn’t it? Open the title-page,” Nonsense, I said, Tm only going to put the hook with the rest of the things. I yawned, I wandered to the table beside the bed. I picked up the book. I caught my foot in from my hands on to the floor. It fell open, at the title-page.
"Max from Rebecca.” She was dead, and one must not have thoughts about the dead. They slept in peace, the grass blew over their graves. How alive was her writing though, how full of force. Those curious, sloping letters. The blob of ink. Done yesterday. It was just as if it had been written yesterday. I took my nail scissors from the dressing-case and cut the page, looking over my shoulder like a criminal.
I cut the page right out of the book. I left no jagged edges, and the book looked white and clean when the page was gone. A new book, that had not been touched. I tore the page up in many Httle fragments and threw them into the wastepaper basket. Then I went and sat on the window seat again. But I kept thinking of the torn scraps in the basket, and after a moment I had to get up and look in the basket once more. Even now the ink stood up on the fragments thick and black, the writing was not destroyed. I took a box of matches and set
fire to the fragments. The flame had a lovely light, staining the paper, curling the edges, making the slanting writing impossible to distinguish. The fragments fluttered to grey ashes. The outwards for a moment, becoming larger than ever. Then it crumpled too; the flame destroyed it. It was not ashes even, it was feathery dust,... I went and washed my hands in the basin. I felt better, much better. I had the clean, new feeling that one has when the calendar is hung on the wall at the beginning of the year. January the 1st. I was aware of the same freshness, the same gay confidence. The door opened and he came into the room.
"Airs well,” he said; "shock made her speechless at first, but she's beginning to recover, so Tm going downstairs to the office, to make certain she wiU catch the first train. For a moment she wavered, I think she had hopes of acting witness at the wedding, but I was very firm. Go and talk to ber.”
He said nothing about being glad, about being happy. He did not take my arm and go into the sitting-room with me. He smiled, and waved his hand, and went off down the corridor alone. I went to Mrs. Van Hopper, uncertain, rather selfconscious, like a maid who has handed in her notice through a friend.
She was standing by the window, smoking a cigarette, an odd, dumpy little figure I should not see again, her coat stretched tight over her large breasts, her ridiculous hat perched sideways on her head.
"Well,” she said, her voice dry and hard, not the voice she would have used to him, "I suppose iVe got to hand it to you for a double-time worker. Still waters certainly run deep in your case. How did you manage it?”
I did not know what to answer. I did not like her smile.
"It was a lucky thing for you I had the influenza,” she said.
"I realise now how you spent your days, and why you were so forgetful. Tennis lessons my eye. You might have told me, you know.”
"I'm sorry,” I said.
She looked at me curiously, she ran her eyes over my fig-
lire. '‘And he tells me he wants to marry you in a few days. Lucky again for you that you haven't a family to ask questions. Well, it's nothing to do with me any more, I wash my hands of the whole affair. I rather wonder what his friends will think, but I suppose that's up to him. You realise he's years older than youF'
"He's only forty-two,” I said, "and I'm old for my age.”
She laughed, she dropped cigarette ash on the floor. "You certainly are,” she said. She went on looking at me in a way she had never done before. Appraising me, running her eyes over my points like a judge at a cattle show. There was something inquisitive about her eyes, something unpleasant.
"Tell me,” she said, intimate, a friend to a friend, "have you been doing anything you shouldn't?”
She was like Blaize, the dressmaker, who had offered me that ten per cent.
"I don't know what you mean,” I said.
She laughed, she shrugged her shoulders. "Oh, well... never mind. But I always said English girls were dark horses, for all their hockey-pladng attitude. So I'm supposed to travel to Paris alone, and leave you here while your beau gets a marriage licence? I notice he doesn't ask me to the wedding.”
"I don’t think he wants anyone, and anyway you would have sailed,” I said.
"H'm, h'm,” she said. She took out her vanity case and began powdering her nose. "I suppose you really do know your own mind,” she went on; "after afl, the whole thing has been very hurried, hasn't it? A matter of a few weeks. I don’t suppose he's too easy, and you'll have to adapt yourself to his ways. You've led an extremely sheltered life up to now, you know, and you can't say that I've run you off your feet. You will have your work cut out as mistress of Manderley. To be perfectly frank, my dear, I simply can't see you doing it” Her words sounded like the echo of my own an hour before.
"You haven't the experience,” she continued, "you don't know that milieu. You can scarcely string two sentences together at my bridge teas, what are you going to say to all his
friends? Hie Manderley parties were famous when she was alive Of ooiixse hes told you aU about themF^ I hesitated, but she went on, thank heaven, not waiting for my answer.
"Naturally one wants you to be happy, and I grant you he’s a very attractive creature but— well, Tm sorry; and personally I think you are making a big mistake—one you wdl bitterly regret.”
She put down the box of powder, and looked at me over her shoulder. Perhaps she was being sincere at last, but I did not want that sort of honesty. I did not say anything. I looked sullen, perhaps, for she shrugged her shoulders and wandered to the looking-glass, straightening her httle mushroom hat. I was glad she was going, glad I should not see her again. I grudged the months I had spent witli her, employed by her, taking her money, trotting in her wake hke a shadow, drab and dumb. Of course I was inexperienced, of course I was idiotic, shy and young. I knew all that. She did not have to tell me. I supposed her attitude was deliberate and for some odd feminine reason she resented this marriage, her scale of values had received a shock.
Well, I would not care, I would forget her and her barbed words. A new confidence had been bom in me when I birrnt that page and scattered the fragments. The past would not exist for either of us, we were starting afresh, he and I. The past had blown away like the ashes in the waste-paper basket. I was going to be Mrs. de Winter. I was going to five at Manderley.
Soon she would be gone, rattling alone in the wagon-lit without me, and he and I would be together in the diningroom of the hotel, lunching at the same table, planning the future. The brink of a big adventure. Perhaps, once she had gone, he would talk to me at last, about loving me, about being happy. Up to now there had been no time, and anyway those things are not easily said, they must wait their moment. I looked up, and caught her reflection in the lookingglass. She was watching me, a little tolerant smile on her lips. I thought she was going to be generous after aU, hold out her
hand and wish me luck, give me encouragement and tell me that everything was going to be all right. But she went on smiling, twisting a stray hair into place beneath her hat.
“Of course,” she said, “you know why he is marrdng you, don’t you? You haven’t flattered yourself he’s in love with you? The fact is that empty house got on his nerves to such an extent he nearly went off his head. He admitted as much before you came mto the room. He just can’t go on living there alone...
WE CAME to Manderley in early May, arriving, so Maxim said, with the first swallows and the bluebells. It would be the best moment, before the full flush of summer, and in the valley the azaleas would be prodigal of scent, and the blood-red rhododendrons in bloom. We motored, I remember, leaving London in the morning in a heavy shower of rain, coming to Manderley about five o’clock, in time for tea. I can see myself now, unsuitably dressed as usual, although a bride of seven weeks, in a tan-coloured stockinette frock, a small fur knovm as a stone marten round my neck, and over afl a shapeless mackintosh, far too big for me and dragging to my ankles. It was, I thought, a gesture to the weather, and the length added inches to my height. I clutched a pair of gauntlet gloves in my hands, and carried a large leather handbag.
“This is London rain,” said Maxim when we left, “you wait, the sun will be shining for you when we come to Manderley”; and he was right, for the clouds left us at Exeter, they rolled away behind us, leaving a great blue sky above our heads and a white road in front of us.
I was glad to see tih.e sun, for in superstitious fashion I looked upon rain as an omen of ill-will, and the leaden skies of London had made me silent.
“Feeling better?” said Maxim, and I smiled at him, taking his hand, thinking how easy it was for him, going to his own home, wandering into the hall, picking up letters, ringing a bell for tea, and I wondered how much he guessed of my nervousness, and whether his question, “Feeling better?” meant that he understood. “Never mind, we'll soon be there. I expect you want your tea,” he said, and he let go my hand because we had reached a bend in the road, and must slow down.
I knew then that he had mistaken my silence for fatigue, and it had not occurred to him I dreaded this arrival at Manderley as much as I had longed for it in theory. Now the moment was upon me I wished it delayed, I wanted to draw up at some way-side inn and stay there, in a coiEee-room, by an impersonal fire. I wanted to be a traveller on the road, a bride in love with her husband. Not myself coming to Manderley for the first time, the wife of Maxim de Winter. We passed many friendly villages where th cottage windows had a kindly air. A woman, holding a baby in her arms, smiled at me from a doorway, while a man clanked across a road to a well, carrying a pad.
I wished we coidd have been one witb them, perhaps their neighbours, and that Maxim could lean over a cottage gat© in the evenings, smoking a pipe, proud of a very taU hollyhock he had grown himself, while I bustled in my kitchen, clean as a pin, laying the table for supper. There would be an alarm clock on the dresser ticking loudly, and a row of shining plates, while after supper Maxim would read his paper, boots on the fender, and I reach for a great pile of mending in the dresser drawer. Surely it would he peaceful and steady, that way of living, and easier, too, demanding no set standard?
“Only two miles further,” said Maxim; “you see that great belt of trees on the brow of the hill there, sloping to the valley, with a scrap of sea beyond? That's Mandedey, in there. Those are the woods.”
I forced a smile, and did not answer Mm, aware now of a stab of panic, an uneasy sickness that could not be controlled. Gone was my glad excitement, vanished my happy pride. I was like a child brought to her first school, or a httle untrained maid who has never left home before, seeking a situation. Any measure of self-possession I had gained Mtherto, during the brief seven weeks of marriage, was like a rag now, fluttering before the wind; it seemed to me that even the most elementary knowledge of behaviour was unknown to me now; I should not know my right hand from my left, whether to stand or sit, what spoons and forks to use at dinner.
‘1 should shed that mackintosh,” he said, glancing down at me, “it has not rained down here at all, and put your funny little fur straight. Poor lamb, IVe bustled you down here like this, and you probably ought to have bought a lot of clothes in London.”
“It doesn’t matter to me, as long as you don’t mind,” I said.
“Most women think of nothing but clothes,” he said absently, and turning a comer we came to a cross-road, and the beginning of a high wall,
“Her© w© are,” he said, a new not© of excitement in Ms voice, and I gripped the leather seat of the car with my two hands.
The road curved, and before us, on the left, were two high iron gates beside a lodge, open wide to the long drive beyond. As w© drove through I saw faces peering through the dark window of the lodge, and a child ran round from the hack, staring curiously. I shrank back against the seat, my heart heating quickly, knowing why the faces were at the window, and why the cMld stared.
They wanted to see what I was like. I could imagine them now, talking excitedly, laughing in the little kitchen. “Only caught ^sight of the top of her hat,” they would say, “she wouldn t show her face. Oh, well, well know by to-morrow. Word will com© from the house.” Perhaps he guessed something of my shyness at last for he took my hand, and kissed it, and laughed a little, even as he spoke.
‘^Yoii mustn^t mind if tibere^s a certain amount of curiosity' he said, "everyone will want to know what you are like. They have probably talked of nothing else for weeks. You ve only got to be yourself and they will all adore you. And you don't have to worry about the house, Mrs, Danvers does everything. Just leave it all to her. She'll be stiff with you at first, I dare say, she's an extraordinary character, but you mustn't let it worry you. It's just her manner. See those shrubs? It's like a blue wall along here when the hydrangeas are in bloom."
I did not answer him, for I was thinking of that seif who long ago bought a picture post-card in a village shop, and came out into the bright sunlight twisting it in her hands, pleased with her purchase, thmking "This will do for my album. ‘Manderley,' what a lovely name." And now I belonged here, this was my home, I would write letters to people saying, "We shall be down at Manderley all the summer, you must come and see us," and I would walk along this drive, strange and unfamiliar to me now, with perfect knowledge, conscious of every twist and turn, marking and approving where the gardeners had worked, here a cutting back of the shrubs, there a lopping of a branch, calling at the lodge by the iron gates on some hiendly errand, saying, "Well, how's the leg to-day?" while the old woman, curious no longer, bade me welcome to her kitchen. I envied Maxim, careless and at ease, and the little smile on his lips which meant he was happy to be coming home.
It seemed remote to me, and far too distant, the time when I too should smile and be at ease, and I wished it could come quickly, that I could be old even, with grey hair, and slow of step, having lived here many years, anything but the timid, foohsh creature I felt myself to be.
The gates had shut to witib a crash behind us, the dusty high-road was out of sight, and I became aware that this was not the drive I had imagined would be Manderley's, this was not a broad and spacious thing of gravel, flanked with neat turf at either side, kept smooth with rake and brush.
This drive twisted and turned as a serpent, scarce wider in places than a path, and above our heads was a great colon-
nade of trees, wliose branches nodded and intermingled with one another, making an archway for ns, like the roof of a church. Even the midday sun would not penetrate the interlacing of those green leaves, they were too thickly entwined, one with another, and only htde flickering patches of warm light would come in intermittent waves to dapple the drive with gold. It was very silent, very still. On the high-road there had been a gay west wind blowing in my face, making the grass on the hedges dance in unison, but here there was no wind. Even the engine of the car had taken a new note, throbbing low, quieter than before. As the drive descended to the valley so the trees came in upon us, great beeches with lovely smooth white stems, lifting their myriad branches to one another, and other trees, trees I could not name, coming close, so close that I could touch them with my hands. On w© went, over a little bridge that spanned a narrow stream, and still this drive that was no drive twisted and turned like an enchanted ribbon through the dark and silent woods, penetrating even deeper to the very heart surely of the forest itself, and still there was no clearing, no space to hold a house.
The length of it began to nag at my nerves, it must be this turn, I thought, or round that further bend, but as I leant forward in my seat I was forever disappointed, there was no house, no field, no broad and friendly garden, nothing hut the silence and deep woods. The lodge gates were a memory, and the high-road something belonging to another time, another world.
Suddenly I saw a clearing in the dark drive ahead, and a patch of sky, and in a moment the dark trees had thinned, the nameless shrubs had disappeared, and on either side of us was a wall of colour, blood-red, reaching far above our heads. We were amongst the rhododendrons. There was something bewildering, even shocking, about the suddenness of their discovery. The woods had not prepared me for them, ■^^ey startled me with their crimson faces, massed one upon the other in incredible profusion, showing no leaf, no twig.
nothing but the slaughterous red, lusdous and fantastic, unlike any rhododendron plant I had seen before.
I glanced at Maxim. He was smiling. "Like them?” he said.
I told him "Yes,” a little breathlessly, uncertain whether I was speaking the truth or not, for to me a rhododendron was a homely, domestic thing, strictly conventional, mauve or pink in colour, standing one beside the other in a neat round bed. And these were monsters, rearing to the sky, massed like a battalion, too beautiful I thought, too powerful, they were not plants at all.
We were not far from the house now. I saw the drive broaden to the sweep I had expected, and with the blood-red wall still flanking us on either side; we turned the last comer, and so came to Manderley. Yes, there it was, the Manderley I had expected, the Manderley of my picture post-card long ago. A thing of grace and beauty, exquisite and faultless, lovelier even than I had ever dreamed, built in its hollow of smooth grass-land and mossy lawns, the terraces sloping to the gardens, and the gardens to the sea. As we drove up to the wide stone steps and stopped before the open door, I saw through one of the mullioned windows that the haU was full of people, and I heard Maxim swear under his breath.
"Damn that woman,” he said, "she knows perfectly well I did not want this sort of thing,” and he put on the brakes with a jerk.
"Whaf s the matter?” I said, "who are all those people?”
"Fm afraid you will have to face it now,” he said, in irritation. "Mrs. Danvers has collected the whole damned staff in the house and on the estate to welcome us. Ifs all right, you won't have to say anything, I'll do it all.”
I fumbled for the handle of the door, feeling slightly sick, and cold now too from the long drive, and as I fumbled with the catch the butler came dovm the steps, followed by a footman, and he opened the door for me.
He was old, he had a kind face, and I smiled up at him, holding out my hand, but I don’t think he could have seen, for he took the rug instead, and my small dressing-case, and turned to Maxim, helping me from the car at the same time.
"‘Well, liere we are, Frith,” said Maxim, taking off his gloves, “it was raining when we left London. Yon don't seem to have had it here. Everyone well?”
“Yes, sir, thank you, sir. No, we have had a dry month on the whole. Glad to see you home, and hope you have been keeping well. And Madam too.”
“Yes, w© ax© both well, thank you. Frith. Rather tired JErom the drive, and wanting our tea. I didn't expect this business.” He jerked his head to the hah.
“Mrs. Danvers' orders, sir,” said the man, his face expressionless.
“I might have guessed it,” said Maxim abruptly, “com© on,” he turned to me, “it won't take long, and then you shall have your tea.”
We went together up the flight of steps, Frith and the footman following with the rug and my mackintosh, and I was aware of a little pain at the pit of my stomach, and a nervous contraction in my throat.
I can close my eyes now, and look back on it, and see myself as I must have been, standing on the threshold of the house, a slim, awkward figure in my stockinette dress, clutching in my sticky hands a pair of gauntlet gloves, I can see the great stone hall, the wide doors open to the library, the Peter Lelys and the Vandykes on the walls, the exquisite staircase leading to the minstrels' gallery, and there, ranged on© behind the other in the hall, over-flowing to the stone passages beyond, and to the dining-room, a sea of faces, open-mouthed and curious, gazing at me as though they were the watching crowd about the block, and I the victim with my hands behind my back. Someone advanced from the sea of faces, someone tall and gaunt, dressed in deep black, whose prominent cheek-bones and great, hollow eyes gave her a skull's face, parchment-white, set on a skeleton's frame.
She came towards me, and I held out my hand, envying her for her dignity and her composure; but when she took my hand hers was hmp and heavy, deathly cold, and it lay in mine like a lifeless thing.
“This is Mrs. Danvers,” said Maxim, and she began to
Speak, still leaving that dead hand in mine, her hollow eyes never leaving my eyes, so that my own wavered and would not meet hers, and as they did so her hand moved in mine, the life returned to it, and I was aware of a sensation of discomfort and of shame.
I cannot remember her words now, but I know that she bade me weloom© to Manderley, in the name of herself and the staflF, a stiflF, conventional speech rehearsed for the occasion, spoken in a voice as cold and lifeless as her hands had been. When she had finished she waited, as though for a reply, and I remember blushing scarlet, stammering some sort of thanks in return, and dropping both my gloves in my confusion. She stooped to pick them up, and as she handed them to me I saw a httle smile of scorn upon her bps, and I guessed at once she considered me ill-bred. Something, in the expression of her face, gave me a feeling of imrest, and even when she had stepped back, and taken her place amongst the rest, I could see that black figure standing out alone, individual and apart, and for all her silence I knew her eye to be upon me. Maxim took my arm and made a Httle speech of thanks, perfectly easy and free from embarrassment, as though the making of it was no effort to him at all, and then he bore me off to the Hhrary to tea, closing the doors behind us, and we were alone again.
Two cocker spaniels came from the fireside to greet us. They pawed at Maxim, their long, silken ears strained back with affection, their noses questing his hands, and then they left him and came to me, sniflaing at my heels, rather uncertain, rather suspicious. One was &© mother, blind in one eye, and soon she had enough of me, and took herself with a grunt to the fire again, but Jasper, the younger, put his nose into my hand, and laid a chin upon my knee, his eyes deep} with meaning, his tail a-thump when I stroked his silken ears.
I felt better when I had taken my hat off, and my wretched Httle fur, and thrown them both beside my gloves and my bag on to the window seat It was a deep, comfortable room, with books lining the walls to the ceiling, the sort of room a man would move from never, did he Hve alone; soHd chairs
bosid© a great open fire-place, baskets for tbe two dogs in which I felt they never sat, for the hollows in the chairs had tell-tale marks. The long windows looked out upon the lawns, and beyond the lawns to the distant shimmer of the sea.
There was an old quiet smell about the room, as though the air in it was httle changed, for all the sweet lilac scent and the roses brought to it throughout the early summer. Whatever air cam© to this room, whether from the garden of the unchanging room itself, one with the books, musty and never read, one with the scrolled ceiling, the dark panelling, the heavy curtains.
It was an ancient mossy smell, the smell of a silent church where services axe seldom held, where rusty lichen grows upon the stones and ivy tendrils creep to the very windows. A room for peace, a room for meditation.
Soon tea was brought to us, a stately Httle performance enacted by Frith and the young footman, in which I played no part until they had gone, and while Maxim glanced through his great pile of letters I played with two dripping crumpets, crumbled cake with my hands, and swallowed my scalding tea.
Now and again he looked up at me and smiled, and then returned to his letters, the accumulation of the last months I supposed, and I thought how Httle I knew of his life here at Manderley, of how it went, day by day, of the people he knew, of his friends, men and women, of what bills he paid, what orders he gave about bis household. The last weeks had gone so swiftly, and I— driving by his side through France and Italy—thought only of how I loved him, seeing Venice with his ©yes, echoing his words, asking no questions of the past and future, content with the Httle glory of the Hving present.
For he was gayer than I had thought, more tender than I had Reamed, youthful and ardent in a hundred happy ways, not the Maxim I had first met, not the stranger who sat alone at the table in the restaurant, staring before him, wrapped m his secret self. My Maxim laughed and sang, threw stones
into the water, took my hand, wore no frown between his eyes, carried no burden on his shoulder. I knew hmi as a lover, as a friend, and during those weeks I had forgotten that he had a life, orderly, methodical, a life which must be taken up again, continued as before, making vanished weeks a brief discarded hohday, I watched him read his letters, saw him frown at one, smile at another, dismiss the next with no expression, and but for the grace of God I thought, my letter would be lying there, written from New York, and he would read it in the same indifferent fashion, puzzled at first perhaps by the signature, and then tossing it with a yawn to the pile of others in the basket, reaching for his cup of tea. The knowledge of this chilled me. How narrow a chance had stood between me and what might-have-been, for he would have sat there to his tea, as he sat now, continumg his home life as he would in any case, and perhaps he would not have thought of me much, not with regret anyway, while I, in New York, playing bridge with Mrs. Van Hopper would wait day after day for a letter ihat never came.
I leant back in my chair, glancing about the room, trying to instil into myself some measure of confidence, some genuine realisation that I was here, at Manderley, the house of the picture post-card, the Manderley that was famous. I had to teach myself that all this was mine now, mine as much as his, the deep chair I was sitting in, that mass of books stretching to the ceiling, the pictures on the walls, the gardens, the woods, the Manderley I had read about, all of this was mine now because I was married to Maxim.
We should grow old here together, we should sit like this to our tea as old people, Maxim and I, with other dogs, the successors of these, and the library would wear the same ancient musty smell that it did now. It would know a period of glorious shabhiness and wear when the boys were young
—our boys— for I saw them sprawhng on the sofa with muddy boots, bringing with them always a litter of rods, and cricket bats, great clasp-knives, bows-and-arrows.
On tbe table there, polished now and plain, an ugly case
would stand containing butterflies and moths, and another on© with birds’ eggs, wrapped in cotton wool. “Not all this junk in here,” I would say, “take them to the schoolroom, darlings,” and they would nm off, shouting, calling to on© another, but the little one staying behind, pottering on his own, quieter than the others.
My vision was disturbed by the opening of the door, and Frith came in with the footman to clear the tea. “Mrs. Danvers wondered, Madam, whether you would like to see your room,” he said to me, when the tea had been taken away.
Maxim glanced up from his letters. “What sort of job have they made of the east wing?” he said.
“Very nice indeed, sir, it seems to me; the men made a mess when they were working, of course, and for a time Mrs. Danvers was rather afraid it would not be fimshed by your return. But they cleared out last Monday. I should imagine you would be very comfortable there, sir, it’s a lot lighter of course on that side of the house.”
“Have you been making alterations?” I asked.
“Oh, nothing much,” said Maxim briefly, “only redecorating and pamting the suite in the east wing, which I thought we would us© for ours. As Frith says, it’s much more cheerful on that side of the house, and it has a lovely view of the rosegarden. It was the visitors’ wing when my mother was alive. I’ll just finish these letters and then I’U com© up and join you. Run along and make friends with Mrs. Danvers, it’s a good opportunity.”
I got up slowly, my old nervousness returning, and went out into the haU. I wished I could have waited for him, and then, taking his arm, seen the rooms together. I did not want to go alone, with Mrs. Danvers. How vast the great hall looked now that it was empty. My feet rang on the flagged stones, echoing to the ceiling, and I felt guilty at the sound, as one does in church, self-conscious, aware of the same constraint. My feet mad© a stupid pitter-patter as I walked, and I thought that Frith, with his felt soles, must have thought me foolish.
“It’s very big, isn’t it?” I said, too brightly, too forced, a
schoolgirl still, but be answered me in all solemnity. ‘"Yes, Madam, Manderley is a big place. Not so big as some, of course, but big enough. This was the old banqueting hall, in old days. It is used still on great occasions, such as a big dinner, or a ball. And the public are admitted here, you know, once a week.''"
“Yes,” I said, still aware of my loud footsteps, feeling, as I followed him, that he considered me as he would one of the public visitors, and I behaved like a visitor too, glancing politely to right and left, taking in the weapons on the wall, and the pictures, touching the carved staircase with my hands.
A black figure stood waiting for me at the head of the stairs, the hollow eyes watching me intently from the white skulFs face. I looked around for the stolid Frith, hut he had passed along the hall and into the further corridor.
I was alone now with Mrs. Danvers. I went up the great stairs towards her, and she waited motionless, her hands folded before her, her eyes never leaving my face. I summoned a smile, which was not returned, nor did I blame her, for there was no purpose to the smile, it was a silly thing, bright and artificial. “I hope I haven’t kept you waiting,” I said.
“It’s for you to make your own time. Madam,” she answered. “I’m here to carry out your orders,” and then she turned, through the archway of the gallery, to the corridor beyond. We went along a broad, carpeted passage, and then turned left, through an oak door, and down a narrow flight of stairs and up a corresponding flight, and so to another door. This she flung open, standing aside to let me pass, and I came to a Httle ante-room, or boudoir, furnished with a sofa, chairs, and writing desk, which opened out to a large double bedroom with wide windows, and a bathroom beyond. I went at once to the window, and looked out. The rose-garden lay below, and the eastern part of the terrace, while beyond the rose-garden rose a smooth grass bank, stretching to the near woods.
“You can’t see the sea from here then,” I said, turning to Mrs. Danvers.
‘‘No, not from this wing,” she answered, “you can’t even hear it, either. You would not know the sea was anywhere near, not from this wmg.”
She spoke in a peculiar way, as though something lay behind her words, and she laid an emphasis on the words, “this wing,” as if suggesting that the suite where we stood now held some inferiority.
‘Tm sorry about that, I Bke the sea,” I said.
She did not answer, she just went on staring at me, her hands folded before her.
“However, it’s a very charming room,” I said, “and I’m sure I shall be comfortable. I understand that it’s been done up for our return.”
“Yes,” she said.
“What was it like before?” I asked.
“It had a mauve paper, and diflFerent hangings; Mr. de Wmter did not think it very cheerful. It was never much used, except for occasional visitors. But Mr. de Winter gave special orders in his letter that you would have this room.”
“Then this was not his bedroom originally?” I said.
“No, Madam, he’s never used the rooms in this wing before.”
“Oh,” I said, “he didn’t tell me that,” and I wandered to the dressing-table and began combing my hair. My things were already unpacked, my brashes and comb upon the tray. I was glad Maxim had given me a set of brushes, and that they were laid out there, upon the dressing-table, for Mrs. Danvers to see. They were new, they had cost money, I need not be ashamed of them.
Alice has unpacked for you and will look after you until your maid arrives,” said Mrs. Danvers, I smiled at her again. I put down the brush upon the dressing-table.
“I don’t have a maid,” I said awkwardly, “I m sure Alice, if she is the housemaid, will look after me all right.”
She wore the same expression that she had done on our first meeting, when I dropped my gloves so gauchely on the floor.
I m afraid that would not do for very long,” she said, “it’s
usual, you know, for ladies in your position to have a personal maid.”
I flushed, and reached for my brush again. There was a sting in her words I understood too well. "If you think it necessary perhaps you would see about it for me,” I.said, avoiding her eyes, "some yoimg girl perhaps, wanting to tram.”
"If you wish,” she said. "It's for you to say,” There was silence between us, I wished she would go away, I wondered why she must go on standing there, watching me, her hands folded on her black dress.
"I suppose you have been at Manderley for many years,” I said, making a fresh effort, ‘longer than anyone else?”
"Not so long as Frith,” she said, and I thought how lifeless her voice was, and cold, like her hand when it had lain in mine; "Frith was here when the old gentleman was living, when Mr. de Winter was a boy,”
"I see,” I said, "so you did not come till after that?”
"No,” she said, "not till after that.”
Once more I glanced up at her, and once more I met her eyes, dark and sombre, in that white face of hers, instilling into me, I knew not why, a strange feeling of disquiet, of foreboding. I tried to smile, and could not, I found myself held by those eyes, that had no light, no flicker of sympathy towards me.
"I came here when the first Mrs. de Winter was a bride,” she said, and her voice, which had hitherto, as I said, been dull and toneless, was harsh now with unexpected animation, with life and meaning, and there was a spot of colour on the gaunt cflieek-hones.
The change was so sudden that I was shocked, and a little scared. I did not know what to do, or what to say. It was as though she had spoken words that were forbidden, words that she had hidden within herself for a long time and now would be repressed no longer. Still her eyes never left my face, they looked upon me with a curious mixture of pity and of scorn, until I felt myself to he even younger and more untutored in the ways of Hfe than I had beheved.
o
I could see she despised me, marking with all the snobbery o£ her class that I was no great lady, that I was humble, shy and diffident. Yet there was something beside scorn in those eyes of hers, something surely of positive disKke, or actual malice?
I had to say something. I could not go on sitting there, playing with my hair-brush, letting her see how much I feared and mistrusted her.
"Mrs. Danvers, I heard myself saying, “I hope we shall be friends and come to understand one another. You must have patience with me, you know, because this sort of life is new to me. Tve lived rather differently. And I do want to make a success of it, and above all to make Mr. de Wmter happy. I know I can leave all household arrangements to you, Mr. de Winter said so, and you must just run things as they have always been run, I shan t want to make any changes.’"
I stopped, a little breathless, still uncertain of myself and whether I was saying the right thing, and when I looked up again I saw that she had moved, and was standing with her hand on the handle of the door.
"Very good,” she said; "I hope I shall do everything to your satisfaction. The house has been in my charge now for more than a year, and Mr. de Winter has never complained. It was very different of course when the late Mrs. de Winter was ahve, there was a lot of entertaining then, a lot of parties, and though I managed for her she liked to supervise things herself.”
Once again I had the impression that she chose her words with care, that she was feehng her way, as it were, into my mind, and watching for the effect upon my face.
"I would rather leave it to you,” I repeated, “much rather,” and into her face came the same expression I had noticed before, when first I had shaken hands with her in the hall, a look surely of derision, of definite contempt. She knew that I would never withstand her, and that I feared her too.
“Can I do anything more for you?” she said, and I pretended to glance round the room. “No,” I said. “No, I tbir>k I have everything. I shall be very comfortable here. You
i
have made tibe room so charming'—tliis last a final crawling sop to win her approval. She shrugged her shoulders, and still she did not smile. 1 only followed out Mr. de Wintes instructions,” she said.
She hesitated by the doorway, her hand on the handle of the open door. It was as though she still had something to say to me, and could not decide upon the words, yet waited there, for me to give her opportunity.
I wished she would go: she was like a shadow standing there, watching me, appraising me with her hollow eyes, set in that dead skull's face.
“If you find anything not to your liking you wiH tell me at once?” she asked.
"'Yes,” I said. "Yes, of course, Mrs. Danvers,” but I knew this was not what she had meant to say, and silence fell between us once again.
"If Mr. de Winter asks for his big wardrobe,” she said suddenly, "you must tell him it was impossible to move. We tried, but we could not get it through these narrow doorways. These are smaller rooms than those in the west wing. If he doesn't like the arrangement of this suite he must tell me. It was difficult to know how to furnish these rooms.”
"Please don't worry, Mrs. Danvers,” I said, "I'm sure he will be pleased with everything. But I'm sorry it's given you so much trouble. I had no idea he was having rooms redecorated and furnished, he shouldn't have bothered. I'm sure I should have been just as bappy and comfortable in the west wing.”
She looked at me curiously, and began twisting tbe handle of the door. "Mr. de Winter said you would prefer to be on this side,” she said, "the rooms in the west wing are very old. The bedroom in the big suite is twice as large as this, a very beautiful room too, with a scrolled ceiling. The tapestry chairs are very valuable, and so is the carved mantelpiece. It's the most beautiful room in the house. And the windows look down across’ the lawns to the sea.”
I felt uncomfortable, a litde shy. I did not know why she must speak with such an undercurrent of resentment, implying as she did at the same time that this room, where I found
myself to be installed, was something inferior, not up to Manderley standard, a second-rate room, as it were, for a second-rate person.
'1 suppose Mr. de Winter keeps tbe most beautiful room to show to the public,' I said. She went on twisting the handle of the door, and then looked up at me again, watching my ©yes, hesitating before replying, and when she spoke her voice was quieter even, and more toneless, than it had been before.
“The bedrooms are never shown to the public," she said,
“only the hall and the gallery, and the rooms below." She paused an instant, feeling me with her eyes. “They used to live in the west wing and us© those rooms when Mrs. de Winter was alive. That big room I was teUing you about, that looked down to the sea, was Mrs. d© Winter's bedroom."
Then I saw a shadow flit across her face, and she drew back against the wall, effacing herself, as a step sounded outside and Maxim came into the room.
“How is it?" he said to me, “all right? Do you think you'll lik© it?"
He looked around with enthusiasm, pleased as a schoolboy. “I always thought this a most attractive room," he said.
“It was wasted all those years as a guest-room, but I always thought it had possibilities. You've made a great success of it, Mrs. Danvers, I give you full marks."
“Thank you, sir," she said, her face expressionless, and then she turned, and went out of the room, closing the door softly behind her.
Maxim went and leant out of the window. “I love the rosegarden," he said; “one of the first things I remember is walking after my mother, on very small, unsteady legs, while she picked off the dead heads of the roses. There's something peaceful and happy about this room, and it's quiet too. You could never tell you were within five minutes of the sea, from this room."
“That's what Mrs. Danvers said,” I told him.
He came away from the window, he prowled about the
room, touching things, looking at the pictures, opening wardrobes, fingering my clothes, already unpacked.
“How did you get on with old Danvers?” he said abruptly.
I turned away, and began combing my hair again before the looking-glass. “She se^s just a little bit sti£E,” I said, after a moment or two, “perhaps she thought I was going to interfere with the running of the house.”
“I don^t think she would mind your doing that,” he said. I looked up and saw him watching my reflection in the lookingglass, and then h© turned away and went over to the window again, whistling quietly, under his breath, rocking backwards and forwards on his heels.
“Don’t mind her,” he said, “she’s an extraordinary character in many ways, and possibly not very easy for another woman to get on with. You mustn’t worry about it If she really makes herself a nuisance we’ll get rid of her. But she’s efficient, you know, and will take all housekeeping worries off your hands. I dare say she’s a bit of a bully to the staff. She doesn’t dare bully me though. I’d have given her the sack long ago if she had tried.”
“I expect we shall get on very well when she knows me better,” I said quickly, “after al, it’s natural enough that she should resent me a bit at first.”
“Resent you, why resent you? What the devil do you mean?” he said.
He turned from the window, frowning, an odd, half-angry expression on his face. I wondered why he should mind, and wished I had said something else.
“I mean, it must be much easier for a housekeeper to look after a man alone,” I said. “I dare say she had got into the way of doing it, and perhaps she was afraid I should be very overhearing.”
“Overhearing, my God.. he began, “if you think.. and then he stopped, and came across to me, and kissed me on the top of my head.
“Let’s forget about Mrs. Danvers,” he said; “she doesn’t interest me very much, I’m afraid. Come along, and let me show you something of Manderley.”
I did not see Mrs. Danvers again tibat evening, and we did not talk about ber any more. I felt happier, when I had dismissed her from my thoughts, less of an interloper, and as we wandered about the rooms downstairs, and looked at the pictures, and Maxim put his arm round my shoulder, I began to feel more like ihe self I wanted to become, the self I had pictured in my dreams, who made Manderley her home.
My footsteps no longer sounded foolish on the stone flags of the hall, for Maxim’s nailed shoes made far more noise than mine, and the pattering feet of the two dogs was a comfortable, pleasing note.
I was glad, too, because it was the first evening, and we had only been back a little while, and the showing of the pictures had taken time, when Maxim, looking at the clock, said it was too late to change for dinner, so that I was spared the embarrassment of Alice, the maid, asking what I should wear, and of her helping me to dress, and myself walking down that long flight of stairs to the hall, cold, with bare shoulders, in a dress that Mrs. Van Hopper had given me because it did not suit her daughter. I bad dreaded the formality of dinner in that austere dining-room, and now, because of the little fact that we had not changed, it was quite all right, quite easy, just the same as when we had dined together in restaurants. I was comfortable in my stockinette dress, I laughed and talked about things we had seen in Italy and France, we even had the snapshots on the table, and Frith and the footman were impersonal people, as the waiters had been: they did not stare at me as Mrs. Danvers had done.
We sat in the library after dinner, and presently the curtains were drawn, and more logs thrown on to the fire. It was cool for May; I was thankful for the warmth that came from the steadily burning logs.
It was new for us to sit together Hke this, after dinner, for in Italy we had wandered about, walked or driven, gone into little ca£s, leant over bridges. Maxim made instinctively now for the chair on the left of the open fireplace, and stretched out his hand for the papers. He settled one of the broad cushions behind his head, and lit a cigarette. “This is his
routine,” I thought, “this is what he always does, this has been his custom now for years.”
He did no-t look at me, he went on reading his paper, contented, comfortable, having assumed his way of living, the master of his house. And as I sat there, brooding, my chm in my hands, fondling the soft ears of one of the spaniels, it came to me that I was not the first one to lounge there in possession of the chair, someone had been before me, had surely left an imprint of her person on the cushions, and on the arm where her hand had rested. Another one had poured the coffee from that same silver coffee pot, had placed the cup to her Hps, had bent down to the dog, even as I was doing.
Unconsciously I shivered, as though someone had opened the door behind me, and let a draught into the room. I was sitting in Rebecca’s chair, I was leaning against Rebecca’s cushion, and the dog had come to me and laid his head upon my knee because that had been his custom, and he remembered, in the past, she had given sugar to him there.
I HAD NEVER realised, of course, that life at Manderley would be so orderly and planned. I remember now, looking back, how on that first morning Maxim was up and dressed and writing letters, even before breakfast, and when I got downstairs, rather after nine o'clock, a little flurried by the booming summons of the gong, I found he had nearly fimshed, he was already peeling his fruit.
He looked up at me and smiled. “You mustnt mind, he said, “this is somethmg you wiU have to get used to. I ve no time to hang about at this hour of the day. Running a place
like Manderley, you know, is a full-time job. The coflEe© and tb© bot dishes are on the side-board. We always help ourselves at breakfast.” I said sometiimg about my clock being slow, about having been too long in the bath, but he did not listen, he was looking down at a letter, frowning at something.
How impressed I was, I remember well; impressed and a little over-awed by the magnificence of the breakfast offered to us. There was tea, in a great silver um, and coffee too, and on the heater, piping hot, dishes of scrambled eggs, of bacon, and another of fish. There was a little clutch of boiled eggs as well, in their own special heater, and porridge, in a silver porringer. On another side-board was a ham, and a great piece of cold bacon. There were scones too, on the table, and toast, and various pots of jam, marmalade, and honey, while dessert dishes, piled high with fruit, stood at either end. It seemed strange to me that Maxim, who in Italy and France had eaten a croissant and fruit only, and drunk a cup of coffee, should sit down to this breakfast at home, enough for a dozen people, day after day probably, year after year, seeing nothing ridiculous about it, nothing wasteful.
I noticed he had eaten a small piece of fish. I took a boiled egg. And I wondered what happened to the rest, all those scrambled eggs, that crisp bacon, the porridge, the remains of the fish. Were there menials, I wondered, whom I should never know, never see, waiting behind kitchen doors for the gift of our breakfast? Or was it all thrown away, shovelled into dustpans? I would never know, of course, I would never dare to ask.
^Thank the Lord I haven't a great crowd of relations to inflict upon you,” said Maxim; sister I very rarely see, and a 'grandmother who is nearly blind. Beatrice, by-the-way, asks herself over to lunch. I half expected she would. I suppose she wants to have a look at you.”
‘To-day?” I said, my spirits sinking to zero,
"Yes, according to the letter I got this morning. She won't stay long. You 11 hke her, I think. She' s very direct, believes in speaking her mind. No humbug at all. If she doesn't like you she'll tell you so, to your face.”
I found £his hardly comforting, and wondered if there was not some virtue in quality of insincerity. Maxim got up from his chair, and lit a cigarette. Tve a mass of things to see to this morning, do you think you can amuse yourself?” he said, ‘‘rd like to have taken you round the garden, but I must see Crawley, my agent. I Ve been away from things too long. He^ll be in to lunch, too, by-the-way. You don't mind, do you? You win he all right?”
'‘Of course,” I said, "I shall be quite happy.”
Then he picked up his letters, and went out of the room, and I remember thinking this was not how I had imagined my first morning; I had seen us walking together, arms linked, to the sea, coming back rather late and tired and happy to a cold lunch, alone, and sitting afterwards under that chestnut tree I could see from the library window.
I Lingered long over my first breakfast, spinning out the time, and it was not until I saw Frith come in and look at me, from behind the Service screen, that I realised it was after ten o'clock. I sprang to my feet at once, feeling guilty, and apologised for sitting there so late, and he bowed, saying nothing, very polite, very correct, but I caught a flicker of surprise in his eyes. I wondered if I had said the wrong thing. Perhaps it did not do to apologise. Perhaps it lowered me in his estimation. I wished I knew what to say, what to do. I wondered if he suspected, as Mrs. Danvers had done, that poise, and grace, and assurance were not qualities inbred in me, but were things to be acquired, painfully perhaps, and slowly, costing me many bitter moments.
As it was, leaving the room, I stumbled, not looking where I was going, catching my foot on the step by the door, and Frith came forward to help me, picking up my handkerchief, while Kobert, the yoxmg footman, who was standing behind the screen, turned away to hide his smile.
I heard the murmur of their voices as I crossed the hall, and one of them laughed, Robert, I supposed. Perhaps they were laughing about me. I went upstairs again, to the privacy of my bedroom, but when I opened the door I found the housemaids in there doing the room; one was sweeping the
floor, the other dusting the dressing-table. They looked at me in surprise. I quickly went out again. It could not be right then, for me to go to my room at that hour in the morning. It was not expected of me. It broke the household routine. I crept downstairs once more, silendy, thankful of my slippers that mad© no sound on the stone flags, and so into the library which was chflly, the windows flung wide open, the fire laid but not lit.
I shut the windows and looked round for a box of matches. I could not find one. I wondered what I should do. I did not like to ring. But the library, so snug and warm last night with the burmng logs, was like an ice-house now, in the early morning. There were matches upstairs in the bedroom, but I did not like to go for them because it would mean disturbing the housemaids at their work. I could not bear their moon faces staring at me again. I decided that when Frith and Bobert had left the dining-room I would fetch the matches from the side-board. I tiptoed out into the hall and listened. They were stiU clearing, I could hear the sound of voices, and the movement of trays. Presently all was silent, they must have gone through the Service doors into the kitchen quarters, so I went across the hall and into the dining-room once more. Yes, there was a box of matches on the side-board, as I expected. I crossed the room quickly, and picked them up, and as I did so. Frith came back into the room. I tried to cram the box furtively into my pocket, but I saw him glance at my hand in surprise.
'‘Did you require anything. Madam?” he said.
"Oh, Frith,” I said awkwardly, "I could not find any matches.” He at once proflFered me another box, handing me the cigarettes too, at the same tune. This was another embarrassment, for I did not smoke.
No, the fact is, I said, ‘I felt rather cool in the library, I suppose the weather seems chilly to me, after being abroad, and I thought perhaps I would just put a match to the fire.”
"The fire in the library is not usually lit until the after noon,^ Madam, he said. "Mrs. de Winter always used the morning-room. There is a good fire in there. Of course if you
should wish tO' have the fire in the library as well I will give orders for it to be lit.^
'‘Oh, no,” I said, “I would not dream of it. I will go into the moming-room. Thank you. Frith.’
"You will find writing-paper, and pens, and ink, in there, Madam,” he said. "Mrs. de Winter always did all her correspondence and telephoning in the moming-room, after breakfast. The house telephone is also there, should you wish to speak to Mrs. Danvers.”
‘Thank you. Frith,” I said.
I turned away into the hall again, humming a little tune to give me an air of confidence. I could not tell him that I had never seen the moming-room, that Maxim had not shown it to me the night before. I knew he was standing in the entrance to the dining-room, watching me, as I went across the hall, and that I must make some show of knowing my way. There was a door to the left of the great staircase, and I went recklessly towards it, praying in my heart that it would take me to my goal, but when I came to it and opened it I saw that it was a garden-room, a place for odds and ends; there was a table where flowers were done, there were basket chairs stacked against the wall, and a couple of mackintoshes too, hanging on a peg. I came out, a little defiantly, glancing across the hall, and saw Frith still standing there. I had not deceived him though, not for a moment.
"You go through the drawing-room to the moming-room. Madam,” he said, "through the door there, on your right, this side of the staircase. You gO’ straight through the double drawing-room, and turn to your left.”
“Thank you. Frith,” I said humbly, pretending no longer.
I went through the long draAving-room, as he had directed, a lovely room this, beautifully proportioned, looking out upon the lawns down to the sea. The public would see this room, I supposed, and Frith, if he showed them round, would know the history of the pictures on the wall, and the period of the furniture. It was beautiful of course; I knew that, and those chairs and tables probably without price, but for all that I had no wish to linger there. I could not see myself sitting ever
in those chairs^ standing before that carved mantelpiece, throwing books down on to the tables. It had all the formality of a room in a museum, where alcoves were roped off, and a guardian, in cloak and hat hke the guides in the French chateaux, sat in a chair beside the door. I went through then, and turned to the left, and so on to the little morning-room I had not seen before.
I was glad to see the dogs there, sitting before the fire, and Jasper, the younger, came over to me at once, his tail wagging, and thrust his nose into my hand. The old one lifted her muzzle at my approach, and gazed in my direction with her blind eyes, but when she had sniffed the air a moment, and found I was not the one she sought, she turned her head away wnfh a grunt, and looked steadily into the fire again. Then Jasper left me, too, and settled himself by the side of bis companion, licking his side. This was their routine. They knew, even as Frith had known, that the library fire was not lit until the afternoon. They came to the morningroom from long custom. Somehow I guessed, before going to the window, that the room looked out upon the rhododendrons, Yes, there they were, blood-red and luscious, as I had seen them the evening before, great bushes of them, massed beneath the open window, encroaching on to the sweep of the drive itself. There was a little clearing too, between the bushes, like a miniature lawn, the grass a smooth carpet of moss, and in the centre of this, the tiny statue of a naked faun, his pipes to his lips.
The crimson rhododendrons made his background, and the clearing itself was Hke a little stage, where he would dance, and play his part. There was no musty smeU about this room, as there had been in the library. There were no old wellworn chairs, no tables Uttered with magazines and papers? seldom if ever read, but left there from long custom, because Maxim s father, or even his grandfather perhaps, had wished it so.
This was a woman s room, graceful, fragile, the room of someone who had chosen every particle of furniture with great care, so that each chair, each vase, each small, infini-
tesimal thing should be in harmony with one another^ and with her own personality. It was as though she who had arranged this room had said: '‘This I will have, and this, and this,” taking piece by piece from the treasures in Manderley each object that pleased her best, ignoring the second-rate, the mediocre, laying her hand with sure and certain instinct only upon the best. There was no interminghng of style, no confusing of period, and the result was perfection in a strange and startling way, not coldly formal like the drawing-room shown to the public, but vividly alive, having something of the same glow and brilliance that the rhododendrons had, massed there, beneath the window. And I noticed then that the rhododendrons, not content wdth forming their theatre on the little lawn outside the window, had been permitted to the room itself. Their great warm faces looked down upon me from the mantelpiece, they floated in a bowl upon the table by the sofa, they stood, lean and graceful, on the writing desk beside the golden candlesticks.
The room was filled with them, even the walls took colour from them, becoming rich and glowing in the morning sun. They were the only flowers in the room, and I wandered if there was some purpose in it, whether the room had been arranged originally with this one end in view, for nowhere else in the house did the rhododendrons obtrude. There were flowers in the dining-room, flowers in the library, but orderly and trim, rather in the backgroimd, not like this, not in profusion, I went and sat down at the writing desk, and I thought how strange it was that this room, so lovely and so rich in colour, should be, at the same time, so business-like and purposeful. Somehow I should have expected that a room furnished as this was in such exquisite taste, for all the exaggeration of the flowers, would be a place of decoration only, languorous and intimate.
But this writing-table, beautiful as it was, was no pretty toy where a woman would scribble httle notes, nibbling the end of a pen, leaving it, day after day, in carelessness, the blotter a Httle askew. The pigeon-holes were docketed, “letters-unanswered,” “letters-to-keep,” “household,” “estate,”
“menus,” “miscellaneous,” “addresses”; each ticket written in that same scrawling pointed hand that I knew already. And it shocked me, even startled me, to recognise it again, for I had not seen it since I had destroyed the page from the hook of poems, and I had not thought to see it again.
I opened a drawer at hazard, and there was the writing
“Guests at Manderley” showed at once, divided into weeks and months, what visitors had come and gone, the rooms they had used, the food they had eaten. I turned over the pages, and saw that the book was a complete record of a year, so that the hostess, glancing back, would know to the day, almost to the hour, what guest had passed what laight under her roof, and where he had slept, and what she had given him to eat. There was note-paper also in the drawer, thick white sheets, for rough writing, and the note-paper of the house, with the crest, and the address, and visiting cards, ivory-white, in little boxes.
I took one out and looked at it, unwrapped it from its thin tissue of paper. “Mrs. M. da Wmter” it said, and in the corner
“Manderley.” I put it back in the box again, and shut the drawer, feeling guilty suddenly, and deceitful, as though I were staying in somebody else’s house and my hostess had said to me, “Yes, of course, write letters at my desk,” and I had unforgivably, in a stealthy manner, peeped at her correspondence. At any moment she might come back into the room, and she would see me there, sitting before her open drawer, which I had no right to touch.
And when the telephone rang, suddenly, alarmingly, on the desk in front of me, my heart leapt and I started up in terror, thinkmg I had been discovered. I took the receiver off with trembling bands, and “Who is it?” I said, “who do you want?” There was a strange buzzing at the end of the line, and then a voice came, low and rather harsh, whether that of a woman or a man I could not tell, and “Mrs. de Winter?” it said, “Mrs. de WinterF'
“Tm afraid you have made a mistake,” I said, “Mrs. de Winter has been dead for over a year.” I sat there, waiting.
staring stupidly into the mouthpiece, and it was not until the name was repeated again, the voice incredulous, slightly raised, that I became aware, with a rush of colour to my face, that I had blxmdered irretrievably, and could not talce back my words. "Ifs Mrs. Danvers, Madam,” said the voice, "Fm speaking to you on the house telephone.” My faux-pas was so palpably obvious, so idiotic and unpardonable, that to ignore it would show me to be an even greater fool if possible, than I was already.
!Tm sorry, Mrs. Danvers,” I said stammering, my words tumbling over one another, the telephone startled me, I didn't know what I was saying, I didn't realise the call was for me, and I never noticed I was speaking on the house telephone.”
Tm sorry to have disturbed you. Madam,” she said, and she knows, I thought, she guesses I have been looking ihrough the desk, ‘1 only wondered whether you wished to see me, and whether you approved of the menus for to-day.”
‘"Oh,” I said. “Oh, Fm sure I do, that is, I’m sure I approve of the menus, just order what you like, Mrs. Danvers, you needn't bother to ask me.”
“It would be better I think if you read the list,” continued the voice, “you will find the menu of the day on the blotter, beside you.”
I searched feverishly about me on the desk, and found at last a sheet of paper I had not noticed before. I glanced hurriedly through it, curried prawns, roast veal, asparagus, cold chocolate mousse—was this lunch or dinner, I could not see, lunch I suppose.
“Yes, Mrs. Danvers,” I said, “very suitable, very nice indeed.”
“If you wish anything changed please say so,” she answered, “and I wiU give orders at once. You will notice I have left a blank space beside the sauce, for you to mark your preference. I was not sure what sauce you are used to having served with the roast veal. Mrs. de Winter was most particular about her sauces, and I always had to refer to her.”
hardly know; I think we had better have what you usually have, whatever you think Mrs. de Winter would have ordered.”
“"You have no preference. Madam?”
“No,” I said. “No, really, Mrs. Danvers.”
“I rather think Mrs. de Winter would have ordered a wine sauce, Madam.”
“We will have the same then, of course,” I said.
“I m very sorry I disturbed you while you were writing. Madam.”
“You didn't disturb me at all,” I said, “please don't apologise.”
“The post leaves at midday, and Robert will come for your letters, and stamp them himself,” she said; “ail you have to do is to ring through to him, on the telephone, if you have anything urgent to be sent, and he will give orders for them to be taken in to the post-office immediately.”
“Thank you, Mrs. Danvers,” I said. I listened for a moment, but she said no more, and then I heard a httle click at the end of the telephone, which meant she had replaced the receiver. I did the same. Then I looked down again at the desk, and the note-paper, ready for use, upon the blotter. In front of me stared the ticketed pigeon-holes, and the words upon them “letters-unanswered,” “estate,” “miscellaneous,” were hke a reproach to me for my idleness. She who sat here before me had not wasted her time, as I was doing. She had reached out for the house telephone and given her orders for the day, swiftly, efficiently, and run her pencil perhaps through an item in the menu that had not pleased her. She had not said, “Yes, Mrs. Danvers,” and “Of course, Mrs. Danvers,” as I had done. And then, when she had finished, she began her letters, five, six, seven, perhaps to be answered, written in that same curious, slanting hand I knew so weU. She would tear off sheet after sheet of that smooth white paper, using it extravagantly, because of the long strokes she made when she wrote, and at the end of each of her personal letters she put her signature, “Rebecca,” that tall sloping R dwarfing its fellows.
I drummed with my fingers on the desk. The pigeon-holes were empty now. There were no “letter s-xmanswered” waiting to be dealt with, no bills to pay that I knew anything about. If I had anything urgent, Mrs. Danvers said, I must telephone through to Robert and he would give orders for it to be taken to the post. I wondered how many urgent letters Rebecca used to write, and who they were written to. Dressmakers perhaps—"! must have the white satin on Tuesday, without fail,” or to her hair-dresser— “I shall be coming up next Friday, and want an appointment at three o^clock with Monsieur Antoine himself. Shampoo, massage, set, and manicure.” No, letters of that type would be a waste of time. She would have a call put through to London, Frith would do it. Frith would say, “I am speaking for Mrs. de Winter.” I went on drumming with my fingers on the desk. I could think of nobody to write to. Only Mrs. Van Hopper. And there was something foolish, rather ironical, in the reahsation that here I was sitting at my own desk in my own home with nothing better to do than to write a letter to Mrs. Van Hopper, a woman I disliked, whom I should never see again. I pulled a sheet of note-paper towards me. I took up the narrow, slender pen, with the bright pointed mb. “Dear Mrs. Van Hopper,” I began. And as I wrote, in halting, laboured fashion, saying I hoped the voyage had been good, that she had found her daughter better, that the weather in New York was fine and warm, I noticed for the first time how cramped and unformed was my own hand-writing, without individuality, without style, uneducated even, the writing of an indifferent pupil taught in a second-rate school
“T^TTiEN I Heard the sound of the car in the drive I got up in W sudden pamc, glancing at the clock, for I knew tliat it meant Beatrice and her husband had arrived. It was only just gone twelve, they were much earlier than I expected. And Maxim was not yet back. I wondered if it would be possible to hide, to get out of the wmdow into the garden, so that Frith, bringing them to the moming-room, would say '‘Madam must have gone out,” and it would seem quite natural, they would take it as a matter of course. The dogs looked up enquiringly as I ran to the window, and Jasper followed me, wagging his tail.
The window opened out on to the terrace and the little grass clearing beyond, but as I prepared to brush past the rhododendrons the sound of voices came close, and I backed again into the room. They were coming to the house by way of the garden. Frith having told them doubtless that I was in the morning-room. I went quickly into the big drawingroom, and made for a door near me on the left. It led into a long stone passage, and I ran along it, fully aware of my stupidity, despising myself for this sudden attack of nerves, but I knew I could not face these people, not for a moment an)wvay. The passage seemed to be taking me to the back regions, and as I turned a comer, coming upon another staircase, I met a servant I had not seen before, a scullery-maid perhaps, she carried a mop and a pail in her hands. She stared at me in wonder, as though I were a vision, unexpected in this part of the house, and "Good-morning,” I said, in great confusion, making for the stairway, and "Good-morning,
Madam,” she returned, her mouth open, her round eyes inquisitive as I climbed the stairs.
They would lead me, I supposed, to the bedrooms, and I could find my suite in the east wing, and sit up there a little while, until I judged it nearly time for lunch, when good manners would compel me to come down again.
I must have lost my bearings, for passing through a door at the head of the stairs I came to a long corridor that I had not seen before, similar in some ways to the one in the east wing, but broader and darher^dark owing to the panelhng of the walls.
I hesitated, then turned left, coming upon a broad landing and another staircase. It was very quiet and dark. No one was about. If there had been housemaids here, during the mornmg, they had finished their work by now and gone downstairs. There was no trace of their presence, no lingering dust smell of carpets lately swept, and I thought, as I stood there, wondering which way to turn, that the silence was unusual, holding something of the same oppression as an empty house does, when the owners have gone away.
I opened a door at hazard, and found a room in total darkness, no chink of light coming through the closed shutters, while I could see dimly, in the centre of the room, the outhn© of furniture swathed in white dust-sheets. The room smelt close and stale, the smeU of a room seldom if ever used, whose ornaments are herded together in the centre of a bed and left there, covered with a sheet. It might be too that the curtains had not been drawn from the window since some preceding summer, and if one crossed there now and pulled them aside, opening the creaking shutters, a dead moth who had been imprisoned behind them for many months would fall to the carpet and He there, beside a forgotten pin, and a dried leaf blown there before the windows were closed for the last time. I shut the door softly, and went uncertainly along the corridor, flanked on either side by doors, all of them closed, until I came to a little alcove, set in an outside wall, where a broad window gave me light at last. I looked out, and I saw below me the smooth grass lawns stretching to the
sea, and ii© sea itself, bright green with white-topped crests, whipped by a westerly wind and scudding from the shore.
It was closer than I had thought, much closer; it ran surely, beneath that little knot of trees below the lawns, barely five minutes away, and if I listened now, my ear to the window, I could hear the surf breaking on the shores of some little bay I could not see, I knew then I had made the circuit of the house, and was standing in the corridor of the west wing. Yes, Mrs. Danvers was right. You could hear the sea from here. You might imagine, in the winter, it would creep up on to those green lawns and threaten the house itself, for even now, because of the high wind, there was a mist upon the window-glass, as though someone had breathed upon it. A mist salt-laden, borne upwards from the sea. A hurrying cloud hid the sun for a moment as I watched, and the sea changed colour instantly, becoming black, and the whit© crests with them very pitiless suddenly, and cruel, not the gay sparkling sea I had looked on first.
Somehow I was glad my rooms were in the east wing. I preferred the rose-garden, after all, to the sound of the sea. I went back to the landing then, at the head of the stairs, and as I prepared to go down, on© hand upon the banister, I heard the door behind me open, and it was Mrs. Danvers. W© stared at one another for a moment without speaking, and I could not be certain whether it was anger I read in her eyes or curiosity, for her face became a mask directly she saw me. Although she said nothing I felt guilty and ashamed, as though I had been caught trespassing, and I felt the tell-tale colour come up into my face.
lost my way,’ I said, “I was trying to find my room You have come to the opposite side of the house, she said, ^'^this is the west wing.
“Yes, I know, I said.
go into any of the rooms? she asked me,
“No, I said. “No, I just opened a door, I did not go in. Everything was dark, covered up in dust-sheets. Im sorry. I did not mean to disturb anything. I expect you like to keep all this shut up.’
''If you wish to open up the rooms I will have it don©’ she saidy "you have only to tell me. The rooms are all furnished, and can be used.”
"Oh, no,” I said. "No, I did not mean you to thinh that.”
"Perhaps you would like me to show you all over the west wing?” she said.
I shook my head. "No, rather not,” I said. "No, I must go downstairs.” I began to walk down the stairs, and she cam© with me, by my side, as though she were a warder, and I in custody.
"Any time, when you have nothing to do, you have only to. ask me, and I will show the rooms in the west wing,” she persisted, making me vaguely uncomfortable, I knew not why. Her insistence struck a chord in my memory, reminding me of a visit to a friend’s house, as a child, when the daughter of the house, older than I, took my arm and whispered in my ear, "I know where there is a book, locked in a cupboard, in my mother’s bedroom. Shall w© go and look at it?” I remembered her white, excited face, and her small, beady eyes, and the way she kept pinching my arm.
"I will have the dust sheets removed, and then you can see the rooms as they looked when they were used,” said Mrs. Danvers. "I would have shown you this morning, but I believed you to be writing letters in the moming-room. You have only to telephone through to my room, you know, when you want me. It would only take a short while to have the rooms in readiness.”
W© had come down the short flight of stairs, and she opened another door, standing aside for me to pass through, her dark eyes questing my face.
"It’s very kind of you, Mrs. Danvers,” I said. "I will let you know sometime.”
We passed out together on to the landing beyond, and I saw we were at the head of the main staircase now, behind the minstrels’ gallery.
"I wonder how you came to miss your way?” she said, "the door through to the west wing is very different to this.”
"I did not come this way,” I said.
lOO
‘‘Then you must have come up the hack way, from the stone passage?” she said.
‘"Yes,” I said, not meeting her eyes. ‘Y’es, I came through a stone passage.”
She went on looking at me, as though she expected me to tell her why I left the morning-room in sudden panic, going through the hack regions, and I felt suddenly that she knew, that she must have watched me, that she had seen me wandering perhaps in that west wing from the first, her eye to a crack in the door. ''Mrs. Lacy, and Major Lacy, have been here some time,” she said. "I heard their car drive up shortly after twelve.”
“Ohl” I said. '1 had not realised that.”
"Frith will have taken them to the moming-room,” she said, "it must be getting on for half-past twelve. You know your way now, donl you?”
"Yes, Mrs, Danvers,” I said. And I went down the big stairway into the hall, knowing she was standing there above me, her eyes watching me.
I knew I must go back now, to the moming-room, and meet Maxim’s sister and her husband. I could not hide in my bedroom now. As I went into the drawing-room I glanced back, over my shoulder, and I saw Mrs. Danvers still standing there at the head of the stairs, like a black sentinel.
I stood for a moment outside the morning-room, Avith my hand on the door, listening to the hum of voices. Maxim had retmned then, while I had been upstairs, bringing his agent with him I supposed, for it sounded to me as if the room was fuU of people. I was aware of the same feeling of sick uncertainty I had experienced so often as a child, when summoned to shake hands with visitors, and turning the handle of the door I blundered in, to be met at once, it seemed, with a sea of faces and a general silence.
Here she is at last,” said Maxim. "Where have you been hiding? We were thinking of sending out a search party. Here is Beatrice, and this is Giles, and this Is Frank Crawley. Look out, you nearly trod on the dog.”
Beatrice was tall, broad-shouldered, very handsome, verv
lOI
much like Maxim about the eyes and jaw, but not as smart as I had expected, much tweedier; the sort of person who would nurse dogs through distemper, know about horses, shoot well. She did not kiss me. She shook hands very firmly, looking me straight in the eyes, and then she turned to Maxim,
‘‘Quit© different from what I expected. Doesn’t answer to your description at aU.”
Everyone laughed, and I joined in, not quite certain if the laugh was against me or not, wondering secretly what it was she had expected, and what had been Maxim's description.
And “This is Giles,” said Maxim, prodding my arm, and Giles stretched out an enormous paw and wrung my hand, squeezing the fingers hmp, genial eyes smiling from behind hom-riimned glasses.
“Frank Crawley,” said Maxim, and I turned to the agent, a colourless, rather thin man with a prominent Adam's apple, in whose eyes I read relief as he looked upon me. I wondered why, but I had no time to think of that, because Frith had com© in, and was offering me sherry, and Beatrice was talking to me again. “Maxim tells me you only got back last night. I had not realised that, or of course we would never have thrust ourselves upon you so soon. Well, what do you think of Manderley?”
“I've scarcely seen anything of it yet,” I answered, “it's beautiful, of course.”
She was looking me up and down, as I had expected, but in a direct, straightforward fashion, not maliciously like Mrs. Danvers, not with unfriendliness. She had a right to judge me, she was Maxim's sister, and Maxim himself came to my side now, putting his arm through mine, giving me confidence.
“You're looking better, old man,” she said to him, her head on one side, considering him, “you've lost that fine-drawn look, thank goodness. I suppose we've got you to thank for that?” nodding at me.
“I'm always very fit,” said Maxim shortly, “never had anything wrong with me in my life. You imagine everyone ill who doesn't look as fat as Giles.”
“Bosh,” said Beatrice, “you know perfectly well you were
a perfect wreck six months ago. Gave me the fright of my life when I came and saw you. I thought you were in for a breakdown. Giles, bear me out. Didn^t Maxim look perfectly ghastly last time we came over, and didn't I say he was heading for a breakdown?”
‘Well, I must say, old chap, you re loohng a dijfferent person,” said Giles. 'Very good thing you went away. Doesn’t he look well, Crawley?”
I could tell by the tightening of Maxim's muscles under my arm that he was trying to keep his temper. For some reason this talk about his health was not welcome to him, angered him even, and I thought it tactless of Beatrice to harp upon it in this way, making so big a point of it.
"Maxim's very sunburnt,” I said shyly, “it hides a multitude of sins. You should have seen him in Vemce, having breakfast on the balcony, trying to get brown on purpose. He thinks it makes him better-looking.”
Everyone laughed, and Mr. Crawley said, “It must have been wonderful in Venice, Mrs. de Winter, this time of the year,” and “Yes,” I said, “we had really wonderful weather. Only one bad day, wasn't it, Maxim?” the conversation drawing away happily from his health, and so to Italy, safest of subjects, and the blessed topic of fine weather. Conversation was easy now, no longer an effort. Maxim and Giles and Beatrice were discussing the running of Maxim's car, and Mr. Crawley was asking if it was true there were no more gondolas in the canals now, only motor-boats. I don't think he would have cared at aU had there been steamers at anchor in the Grand Canal, he was saying this to help me, it was his contribution to the little effort of steering the talk away from Maxim's health, and I was grateful to him, feeling him an ally, for all his dull appearance.
“Jasper wants exercise,” said Beatrice, stirring the dog with her foot; he's getting much too fat, and he's barely two years old. What do you feed him on, Maxim?”
My dear Beatrice, he has exactly the same routine as your dogs, said Maxim. Don t show off and make out you know more about animals than I do.”
‘"Dear old boy, how can you pretend to know what Jasper has been fed on when you’ve been away for a couple of months? Don’t tell me Frith walks to the lodge gates with him twice a day. This dog hasn’t had a run for weeks, I can tell by the condition of his coat.”
‘Td rather he looked colossal than half-starved like that half-wit dog of yours,” said Maxim.
“Not a very intelligent remark when Lion won two firsts at Crufts’ last February,” said Beatrice.
The atmosphere was becommg rather strained again, I could tell by the narrow line of Maxim’s mouth, and I wondered if brothers and sisters always sparred like this, making It uncomfortable for those who listened. I wished that Frith would come in and announce lunch. Or would we be summoned by a booming gong? I did not know what happened at Manderley.
“How far away from us are you?” I asked, sitting down by Beatrice. “Did you have to make a very early start?”
“We’re fifty miles away, my dear, in the next county, the other side of Trowchester. the hunting is so much better with us. You must come over and stay, when Maxim can spare you. Giles will mount you.”
“I’m afraid I don’t hunt,” I confessed, “I learnt to ride, as a child, but very feebly, I don’t remember much about it.”
“You must take it up again,” she said, “you cant possibly live in the country and not ride. You wouldn’t know what to do with yourself. Maxim says you paint. That’s very nice, of course, but there’s no exercise in it, is there? All very well on a wet day when there’ s nothing better to do.”
“My dear Beatrice, we are not all such fresh-air fiends as you,” said Maxim.
“I wasn’t talking to you, old boy. We all know you are perfectly happy slopping about the Manderley gardens and never breaking out of a slow walk,”
“I’m very fond of walking too,” I said swiftly, “I’m sure I shall never get tired of rambling about Manderley. And I can bathe too, when it’s wanner.”
“My dear, you are an optimist,” said Beatrice, “I can hardly
ever remember bathing here. The water is far too cold, and the beach is shingle.”
‘T don t mind that,” I said. T love bathing. As long as the currents are not too strong. Is the bathing safe in the bay?”
Nobody answered, and I realised suddenly what I had said. My heart thumped, and I felt my cheeks go flaming red. I bent down to stroke Jasper s ear, in an agony of confusion.
''Jasper could do with a swim, and get some of that fat off,” said Beatrice, breaking the pause, ‘hut he'd find it a bit too much for him in the bay, wouldn't you, Jasper? Good old Jasper. Nice old man.” We patted the dog together, not looking at one another.
“I say, I'm getting infernally hungry, what on earth is happening to lunch?” said Maxim.
“It's only just on one now,” said Mr. Crawley, “according to the clock on the mantelpiece.”
“That clock was always fast,” said Beatrice.
“It's kept perfect time now for months,” said Maxim.
At that moment the door opened and Frith announced that luncheon was served.
“I say, I must have a wash,” said Giles, looking at his hands.
We all got up and wandered through the drawing-room to the hall m great relief, Beatrice and I a little ahead of the men, she taking my arm.
“Dear old Frith,” she said, “he always looks exactly the same, and makes me feel like a girl again. You know, don't mind me saying so, but you are even younger than I expected, Maxim told me your age, but you're an absolute child. Tell me, are you very much in love with him?”
I was not prepared for this question, and she must have seen the surprise in my face for she laughed lightly, and squeezed my arm.
Dont answer,” she said, ‘T can see what you feel. I'm an interfering bore, aren't I? You mustn't mind me. I'm devoted to Maxim, you know, though we always bicker like cat and dog when we meet. I congratulate you again on his looks. We were all very worried about him this time last year, but of course you know the whole story.” We had come to the din-
ing-room by now, and she said no more, for the servants were there and the others had joined us, but as I sat down, and unfolded my napkin, I wondered what Beatrice would say did she realise that I knew nothing of that precedmg year, no details of the tragedy that had happened down there, in the bay, that Maxim kept these things to himself, that I questioned him never Lunch passed off better than I had dared to hope. There were few arguments, or perhaps Beatrice was exercising tact at last, at any rate she and Maxim chatted about matters concerning Manderley, her horses, the garden, mutual friends, and Frank Crawley, on my left, kept up an easy patter with me for which I was grateful, as it required no effort. Giles was more concerned with food than with the conversation, though now and again he remembered my existence and flung me a remark at hazard.
"Same cook I suppose, Maxim?” he said, when Robert had offered him the cold souffle for the second tune. "I always tell Bee, Manderley's the only place left in England where one can get decent cooking. I remember this souffl of old.”
"I think we change cooks periodically,” said Maxim, '‘but the standard of cooking remains the same. Mrs. Danvers has all the recipes, she teUs them what to do.”
"Amazing woman, that Mrs. Danvers,” said Giles, turning to me, "dont you think so?”
"Oh, yes,” I said, "Mrs. Danvers seems to be a wonderful person.”
"She’s no oil painting though, is she?” said Giles, and he roared with laughter. Frank Crawley said nothing, and looking up I saw Beatrice was watching me. She turned away then, and began talking to Maxim.
"Do you play golf at all, Mrs. de Winter?” said Mr. Crawley.
"No, I’m afraid I don’t,” I answered, glad that the subject bad been changed again, that Mrs. Danvers was forgotten, and even though I was no player, knew nothing of the game, I was prepared to listen to him as long as he pleased; there was something solid and safe and dull about golf, it could
not bring ns into any difficulties. We bad cheese, and coffee, and I wondered whether I was supposed to make a move. I kept looking at Maxim, but he gave no sign, and then Giles embarked upon a story, rather difficult to foUow, about digging a car out of a snow-drift— what had started the train of thought I could not tell— and I listened to him politely, nodding my head now and again and smiling, aware of Maxim becoming restive at his end of the table. At last he paused, and I caught Maxim's eye. He frowned very slightly, and jerked his head towards the door.
I got up at once, shaking the table clumsily as I moved my chair, and upsetting Giles's glass of port. ‘'Oh, dear," I said, hovering, wondering what to do, reaching ineffectively for my napkin, but "All right. Frith will deal with it," said Maxim, "don't add to the confusion. Beatrice, take her out in the garden, she's scarcely seen the place yet."
He looked tired, rather jaded. I began to wish none of them had come. They had spoilt our day anyway. It was too much of an effort, just as we returned. I felt tired too, tired and depressed. Maxim had seemed almost irritable when he suggested we should go into the garden. What a fool I had been, upsetting that glass of port.
We went out on to the terrace and walked down on to the smooth green lawns.
"I think it’s a pity you came back to Manderley so soon,” said Beatrice, "it would have been far better to potter about in Italy for three or four months, and then come back in the middle of the summer. Done Maxim a power of good too, besides being easier from your point of view. I can't help feeling it s all going to be rather a strain here for you at first."
Oh, I dont think so," I said. "I know I shall come to love Manderley.”
She did not answer, and we strolled backwards and forwards on the lawns.
"Tell me a bit about yourself," she said at last, "what was it you were doing in the south of France? Living with some appalling American woman, Maxim said."
I explained about Mrs. Van Hopper, and what had led to
it, and sbe seemed sympathetic but a little vague, as though she was thinking of something else.
'Yes,” she said, when I paused, “it all happened very suddenly, as you say. But of course we were all delighted, my dear, and I do hope you will be happy.”
“Thank you, Beatrice,” I said, “thank you very much.”
I wondered why she said she hoped we would be happy, instead of saying she knew we would be so. She was kind, she was sincere, I liked her very much, but there was a tiny doubt in her voice that made me afraid.
“When Maxim wrote and told me,” she went on, taking my arm, “and said he had discovered you in the south of France, and you were very young, very pretty, I must admit it gave me a bit of a shock. Of course we all expected a social butterfly, very modern and plastered with paint, the sort of girl you expect to meet in those sort of places. When you came into the morning-room before lunch you could have knocked me down with a feather.”
She laughed, and I laughed with her. But she did not say whether or not she was disappointed in my appearance or relieved.
“Poor Maxim,” she said, “he went through a ghastly time, and let’s hope you have made him forget about it. Of course he adores Manderley.”
to tell me more of the past, naturally and easily like this, and something else, way back in my mind, did not want to know, did not want to hear.
“We are not a bit alike, you know,” she said, “our characters are poles apart. I show everything on my face, whether I like people or not, whether I am angry or pleased. There’s no reserve about me. Maxim is entirely different. Very quiet, very reserved. You never know what’s going on in that funny mind of his. I lose my temper on the slightest provocation, flare up, and then it’s all over. Maxim loses his temper once or twice in a year, and when he does—my God-“he does lose it. I don’t suppose he ever will with you. I should think you are a placid little thing.”
io She smiled, and pinched my arm, and I thought about being placid, how quiet and comfortable it sounded, someone with knitting on her lap, with calm unruffled brow. Someone who was never anxious, never tortured by doubt and indecision, someone who never stood as I did, hopeful, eager, frightened, tearing at bitten nails, uncertain which way to go, what star to follow.
"You won t mind me saying so, will youF' she went on,
'hut I think you ought to do something to your hair. Why don't you have it waved? It's so very lanky, isn't it, like that? Must look awful under a hat. Why don't-yon sweep it back behind your ears?"
I did so obediently, and waited for her approval. She looked at me critically, her head on one side. "No," she said.
"No, I ihink that's worse. It's too severe, and doesn't suit you. No, all you need is a wave, just to pinch it up. I never have cared for that Joan of Arc business or whatever they call it. What does Maxim say? Does he think it suits youF'
"I don't know," I said, "he’s never mentioned it."
"Oh, well," she said, "perhaps he likes it. Don't go by me. Tell me, did you get any clothes in London or Paris?"
"No," I said, "we had no time. Maxim was anxious to get home. And I can always send for catalogues."
"I can tell by the way you dress that you don't care a hoot what you wear," she said. I glanced at my flannel skirt apologetically.
"I do,” I said. "I'm very fond of nice things. I've never had much money to spend on clothes up to now."
"I wonder Maxim did not stay a week or so in London and get you something decent to wear," she said. "I must say, I think it's rather selfish of him. So unlike him, too. He's generally so particular."
"Is he?" I said; "he's never seemed particular to me. I don't thj^ he notices what I wear at all. I don't think he minds."
' Oh," she said. "Oh, well, he must have changed then."
She looked away from me, and whistled to Jasper, her hands in her pockets, and then stared up at the house above us.
“You^re not using the west wing then^ she said.
"No" I said. "No, we have the suite in the east wing. It’s all been done up.”
"Has it?” she said, "I didn’t know that. I wonder why.”
"It was Maxim’s idea,” I said, 'he seems to prefer it.”
She said nothing, she went on looking at the windows, and whistling. "How do you get on with Mrs. Danvers?” she said suddenly.
I bent down, and began patting Jasper’s head, and stroking his ears. "I have not seen very much of her,” I said, "she scares me a little. I’ve never seen anyone quite like her before.”
"I don’t suppose you have,” said Beatrice.
Jasper looked up at me with great eyes, humble, rather self-conscious. I kissed the top of his silken head, and put my hand over his black nose.
"There’s no need to be frightened of her,” said Beatrice,
"and don’t let her see it, whatever you do. Of course I’ve never had anything to do with her, and I don’t think I ever want to either. However, she’s always been very civil to me.” I went on patting Jasper’s head.
"Did she seem friendly?” said Beatrice.
"No,” I said. "No, not very.”
Beatrice began whistling again, and she rubbed Jasper’s head with her foot. "I shouldn’t have more to do with her than you can help,” she said.
"No,” I said. "She runs the house very efficiently, there’s no need for me to interfere.”
"Oh, I don’t suppose she’d mind that,” said Beatrice. That was what Maxim had said, the evening before, and I thought it odd that they should both have the same opinion. I should have imagined that interference was the one thing Mrs. Danvers did not want.
"I dare say she will get over it in time,” said Beatrice, "but it may make things rather unpleasant for you at first. Of course she’s insanely jealous. I was afraid she would be.”
"Why?” I asked, looking up at her, "why should she be
no
jealous? Maxim does not seem to b© particularly fond of ber'
"My dear child, its not Maxim shes thinldng of,” said Beatrice, "I think she respects him and all that, but nothing more very much.
"No, you see,”— she paused, frowning a little, looking at me uncertainly— "she resents your being here at aE, thafs the trouble.”
""Why?” I said, "why should she resent meP^
"I thought you knew,” said Beatrice; "I thought Maxim would have told you. She simply adored Rebecca.”
"Oh,” I said. "Oh, I see.”
We both went on patting and stroking Jasper, who, unaccustomed to such attention, roUed over on his back in ecstasy.
"Here are the men,” said Beatrice, "let’s have some chairs out and sit under the chestnut. How fat Giles is getting, he looks quite repulsive beside Maxim. I suppose Frank will go back to the office. What a dull creature he is, never has anything interesting to say. Well, all of you. What have you been discussing? PulEng the world to bits, I suppose.” She laughed, and the others strolled towards us, and we ah stood about. Giles threw a twig for Jasper to retrieve. We aU looked^ at Jasper. Mr. Crawley looked at his watch. "I must be off,” he said, "thank you very much for lunch, Mrs. de Winter.”
You must come often,” I said, shaking hands.
I wandered if the others would go too. I was not sure whether they had just come over for lunch, or to spend the day. I hoped they would go. I wanted to be alone with Maxim again, and that it would be like when we were in Italy. We aE went and sat down under the chestnut tree. Robert brought out chairs and rugs. GEes lay down on his back and tipped his hat over his eyes. After a while he began to jnore, his mouth open.
“Shut up, Giles,” said Beatrice. ‘Tm not asleep,” he muttered, opening his eyes, and shutting them again. I thought him unattractive. I wondered why Beatrice had married
him. She canid never have been in love with him. Perhaps that was what she was thinking about me. I caught her eye upon me now and again, puzzled, reflective, as though she was saying to herself, ‘"What on earth does Maxim see in her?” but kind at the same time, not unfriendly. They were talking about their grandmother.
“We must go over and see the old lady,” Maxim was saying, and “She’s getting gaga,” said Beatrice, “drops food all down her chin, poor darling.”
I hstened to them both, leaning against Maxim’s arm, rubbing my chin on his sleeve. He stroked my hand absently, not thinking, talking to Beatrice.
“That’s what I do to Jasper,” I thought. “I’m being like Jasper now, leaning against him. He pats me now and again, when he remembers, and I’m pleased, I get closer to him for a moment. He hkes me in the way I like Jasper.”
The wind had dropped. The afternoon was drowsy, peaceful. The grass had been new-mown, it smelt sweet and rich, like summer. A bee droned above Giles’s head, and he flicked at it with his hat. Jasper sloped in to join us, too warm in the sun, his tongue lolling from his mouth. He flopped beside me, and began licking his side, his large eyes apologetic. The sun shone on the mulHoned windows of the house, and I could see the green lawns and the terrace reflected in them. Smoke curled thinly from one of the near chimneys, and I wondered if the library fire had been Ht, according to routine.
A thrush flew across the lawn to the magnolia tree outside the dining-room window. I could smell the faint, soft magnolia scent as I sat here, on the lawn. Everything was quiet and still. Very distant now came the washing of the sea in the bay below. The tide must have gone out. The bee droned over us again, pausing to taste the chestnut blossom above our heads. “This is what I always imagined,” I thought,
“this is how I hoped it would be, living at Manderley.”
I wanted to go on sitting there, not talking, not listening to the others, keeping the moment precious for all time, because we were peaceful all of us, we were content and
drowsy even as tibe bee who droned above our heads. In a little while it would be different, there would come to-morrow, and the next day, and another year. And we would h© changed perhaps, never sitting quit© like ihis again. Some of us would go away, or suffer, or die, the future stretched away ha front of us, unknown, unseen, not perhaps what we wanted, not what we planned. This moment was safe though, this could not be touched. Here we sat togeth^, Maxim and I, hand-in-hand, and the past and the future mattered not at aU. This was secure, this funny fragment of time he would never remember, never think about again. He would not hold it sacred, he was talking about cutting away some of the undergrowth in the drive, and Beatrice agreed, interrupting with some suggestion of her own, and throwing a piece of grass at Giles at the same time. For them it was just after lunch, quarter-past-three on a haphazard afternoon, hk© any hour, lik© any day. They did not want to hold it close, imprisoned and secure, as I did. They were not afraid.
“Well, I suppose we ought to be off,” said Beatrice, brushing the grass from her skirt, T don t want to be late, we Ve got the Cartrights dining.”
“How is old Vera?” asked Maxim.
“Oh, same as ever, always talking about her health. He"s getting very old. They re sure to ask all about you both.”
“Give them my love,” said Maxim.
We got up. Giles shook the dust off his hat. Maxim yawned and stretched. The sun went in. I looked up at the sky. It had changed already, a mackerel sky. Little clouds scurrying in formation, line upon line.
“Wind's backing,” said Maxim.
“I hope we don't run into rain,” said Giles.
“fm afraid we ve -had the best of the day,” said Beatrice.
We wandered slowly towards the drive and the waiting car.
“You haven't seen what's been done to the east wing,” said Maxim.
“Come upstairs,” I suggested, “it won't take a minute'
We went into tiie liall, and up the big staircase, the men following behind.
It seemed strange that Beatrice had lived here for so many years. She had run down these same stairs as a little girl, with her nurse. She had been bom here, bred here, she knew it ail, she belonged here more than I should ever do. She must have many memories locked inside her heart. I wondered if she ever thought about the days that were gone, ever remembered the lanky pig-tailed child that she had been once, so different from the woman she had become, fortyfive now, vigorous and settled in her ways, another person. ,..
We came to the rooms, and Giles, stooping under the low doorway, said, "'How very jolly, this is a great improvement, isn’t it, Bee?’’ and "I say, old boy, you have spread yourself,” said Beatrice, ""new curtains, new beds, new everything. You remember, Giles, we had this room that time you were laid up with your leg? It was very dingy then. Of course Mother never had much idea of comfort. And then, you never put people here, did you, Maxim? Except when there was an overflow. The bachelors were always dimiped here. Well, it’s charming, I must say. Looks over the rose-garden too, which was always an advantage. May I powder my nose?”
The men went downstairs, and Beatrice peered in the mirror.
""Did old Danvers do all this for you?” she said.
""Yes,” I said. ""I think she’ s done it very well.”
‘"So she should, with her training,” said Beatrice. “I wonder what on earth it cost. A pretty packet, I bet. Did you ask?”
""No, I’m afraid I did not,” I said.
""I don’t suppose it worried Mrs. Danvers,” said Beatrice;
""do you mind if I use your comb? These are nice brushes. Wedding present?”
""Maxim gave them to me.”
""H’m. I Hke them. We must give you something of course. What do you want?”
""Oh, I don’t really know. You mustn’t bother,” I said.
‘‘My dear, don'^t b© abstird. Im not on© to grudge you a present, even though we weren't asked to your wedding!"
‘1 hope you did not mind about that. Maxim wanted it to be abroad."
“Of course not. Very sensible of you both. After all, it wasn't as though.. she stopped in the middle of her sentence, and dropped her bag. “Damn, have I broken the catch? No, all is well. What was I saying? I can't remember. Oh, yes, wedding presents. W© must think of something. You probably don't car© for jewellery."
I did not answer. “It's so different from the ordinary young couple,” she said. “The daughter of a friend of mine got married the other day, and of course they were started off in the usual way, with linen, and coffee sets, and diningroom chairs, and all that. I gave rather a nice standard lamp. Cost me a fiver at Harrod's. If you do go up to London to buy clothes mind you go to my woman, Madame Carroux. She has damn good taste, and she doesn't rook you.”
She got up from the dressing-table, and pulled at her skirt.
“Do you suppose you will have a lot of people down?” she said.
“I don't know. Maxim hasn't said.”
“Funny old boy, one never quite knows with him. At one time one could not get a bed in the house, the place would he chock-a-block. I can't somehow see you...” she stopped abruptly, and patted my arm. “Oh, well,” she said, “we'U see. It's a pity you don't rid© or shoot, you must miss such a lot. You don't sail by any chance, do youF'
“No,” I said.
“Thank God for that,” she said.
She went to the door, and I followed her down the corridor.
“Com© and see us if you feel like it,” she said. “I always expect people to ask themselves. Life is too short to send out invitations.”
“Thank you very much,” I said.
W© came to the head of the stairs looking down upon the hall. The men were standing on the steps outside. “Come
on, Bee^ shouted Giles, '1 felt a spot of rain, so we ve put on the cover. Maxim says the glass is falling.”
Beatrice took my hand, and bending down gave me a swift peck on my cheek. ""Good-bye,” she said, ""forgive me if Tve asked you a lot of rude questions, my dear, and said all sorts of things I shouldn^'t. Tact never was my strong point, as Maxim will tell you. And, as I told you before, youre not a bit what I expected.” She looked at me direct, her lips pursed in a whistle, and then took a cigarette from her bag, and flashed her lighter.
""You see,” she said, snapping the top, and walking down the stairs, ""you are so very different from Rebecca.”
And we came out on to the steps and found the sun had gone behind a bank of cloud, a little thin rain was falling, and Robert was hurrying across the lawn to bring in the chairs.
WE WATCHED the Car disappear round the sweep of the drive, and then Maxim took my arm and said, ""Thank God, that’s that. Get a coat quickly, and come out. Damn the rain, I want a walk. I can’t stand this sitting about.” He looked white and strained, and I wondered why the entertaining of Beatrice and.Giles, his own sister and brother-inlaw, should have tired him so.
""Wait while I run upstairs for my coat,” I said.
""There’s a heap of mackintoshes in the flower-room, get one of them,” he said impatiently; "‘women are always halfan-hour when they go to their bedrooms. Robert, fetch a frfvTn the flowcr-room, will you, for Mrs. de Winter?
There must be balf-a-dozen raincoats banging there, left bypeople at one time or another' He was already standing in the drive, and calKng to Jasper. "Come on, you lazy little beggar, and take some of that fat off.” Jasper ran round in circles, barking hysterically at the prospect of his walk. "Shut up, you idiot,” said Maxim; "what on earth is Robert doing?”
Robert came running out of the hall carrying a raincoat, and I struggled into it hurriedly, fumbling with the collar. It was too big, of course, and too long, but there was no time to change it, and we set off together across the lawn to the woods, Jasper running in front.
"I find a little of my family goes a very long way,” said Maxim. "Beatrice is one of the best people in the world, but she invariably puts her foot in it.”
I was not sure where Beatrice had blundered, and thought it better not to ask. Perhaps he stQl resented the chat about his health before lunch.
“What did you think of her?” he went on.
“I liked her very much,” I said, “she was very nice to me.”
“What did she talk to you about out here, after lunch?”
“Oh, I don't know. I think I did most of the talking. I was telling her about Mrs. Van Hopper, and how you and I met, and all that. She said I was quite different to what she expected.”
“What the devil did she expect?”
“Someone much smarter, more sophisticated, I imagine. A social butterfly, she said.”
Maxim did not answer for a moment. He bent down, and threw a stick for Jasper. “Beatrice can so-metimes be infernally unintelligent,” he said.
We climbed the grass bank above^the lawns, and plunged into the woods. The trees grew very close together, and it was dark. We trod upon broken twigs, and last year's leaves, and here and there the fresh green stubble of the young bracken, and the shoots of the bluebells soon to blossom. Jasper was silent now, his nose to the ground. I took Maxim's arm.
“Do you like my liair?’' I said.
He stared down at me in astonislnnent. “Yonr Ixair?” lie said, “wliy on earth do you ask? Of course I like it. Wliafs the matter with it?’'
“Oh, nothing,” I said, “I just wondered.”
“How funny you are,” he said.
We cam© to a clearing in the woods, and there were two paths, going in opposite directions. Jasper took the righthand path without hesitation.
The dog looked back at us and stood there, wagging his tail, but did not return. “Why does he want to go that way?” I asked.
“I suppose he’s used to it,” said Maxim briefly, “it leads to a small cove, where we used to keep a boat. Come on, Jasper, old man.”
We turned into the left-hand path, not saying anything, and presently I looked over my shoulder and saw that Jasper was following us.
“This brings us to the valley I told you about,” said Maxim, “and you shall smell the azaleas. Never mind the rain, it will bring out the scent.”
He seemed all right again now, happy and cheerful, the Maxim I knew and loved, and he began talking about Frank Crawley and what a good fellow he was, so thorough and reliable, and devoted to Manderley.
“This is better,” I thought, “this is like it was in Italy,” and I smiled up at him, squeezing his arm, relieved that the odd strained look on his face had passed away, and while I said “Yes,” and “Really?” and “Fancy, darling,” my thoughts wandered back to Beatrice, wondering why her presence should have disturbed him, what she had done, and I thought too of all she had said about his temper, how he lost it, she told me, about once or twice a year.
She must know him, of course; she was his sister. But it was not what I had thought; it was not my idea of Maxim. I could see him moody, difficult, irritable perhaps, but not
exaggerated; people very often were wrong about tbeir relatives.
''There,” said Maxim suddenly, "take a look at that.”
We stood on a slope of a wooded hill, and the path wound away before us to a vaUey, by the side of a running stream. There were no dark trees here, no tangled undergrowth, but on either side of the narrow path stood azaleas and rhododendrons, not blood-coloured like the giants in the drive, but salmon, white, and gold, things of beauty and of grace, drooping their lovely, delicate heads in the soft summer rain.
The air was full of their scent, sweet and heady, and it seemed to me as though their very essence had mingled with the running waters of the stream, and become one with the falhng rain and the dank rich moss beneath our feet. There was no sound here but the tumbling of the httle stream, and the quiet rain. When Maxim spoke, his voice was hushed too, gentle and low, as if he had no wish to break upon the silence.
"We call it ihe Happy Valley,” he said.
We stood quite still, not speaking, looking down upon the clear white faces of the flowers closest to us, and Maxim stooped, and picked up a fallen petal and gave it to me. It was crushed and bruised, and turning brown at the curled edge, but as I rubbed it across my hand the scent rose to me, sweet and strong, vivid as the living tree from which it came.
Then the birds began. First a blackbird, his note clear and cool above the running stream, and after a moment he had answer, from his fellow hidden in the woods behind us, and soon the stiU air about us was made turbulent with song, pursuing us as we wandered down into the valley, and the fragrance of the white petals followed us too. It was disturbing, like an enchanted place. I had not thought it could be as beautiful as this.
The sky, now overcast and sullen, so changed from the early afternoon, and the steady, insistent rain could not disturb the soft quietude of the valley; the rain and the rivulet mingled with one another, and the liquid note of the blackbird fell upon the damp air in harmony with them both. I
bmslied the dripping heads of the azaleas as I passed, so close they grew together, bordering the path. Little drops of water fell on to my hands from the soaked petals. There were petals at my feet too, brown and sodden, bearing their scent upon them still, and a richer, older scent as well, the smell of deep moss and bitter earth, the stems of bracken, and the twisted buried roots of trees. I held Maxim's hand and I had not spoken. The spell of the Happy Valley was upon me. This at last was the core of Manderley, the Manderley I would know and leam to love. The first drive was forgotten, the black, herded woods, the glaring rhododendrons, luscious and over-proud. And the vast house too, the silence of that echoing hall, the uneasy stillness of the west wing, wrapped in dust-sheets. There I was an interloper, wandering in rooms that did not know me, sitting at a desk and in a chair that was not mine. Here it was different. The Happy Valley knew no trespassers. We came to the end of the path, and the flowers formed an archway above our heads. We bent down, passing underneath, and when I stood straight again, brushing the raindrops from my hair, I saw that the valley was behind us, and the azaleas, and the trees, and, as Maxim had described to me that afternoon many weeks ago in Monte Carlo, we were standing in a little narrow cove, the shingle hard and white under our feet, and the sea was breaking on the shore beyond us.
Maxim smiled down at me, watching the bewilderment on my face.
'It's a shock, isn't it?" he said, “no one ever expects it. The contrast is too sudden, it almost hurts." He picked up a stone and flung it across the beach for Jasper. “Fetch it, good man," and Jasper streaked away in search of the stone, his long black ears flopping in the wind.
The enchantment was no more, the spell was broken. We were mortal again, two people playing on a beach. We threw more stones, went to the water's edge, flung ducks and drakes, and fished for driftwood. The tide had turned, and came lapping in. the bay. The small rocks were covered, the washed on the stones. We rescued a big floating
plank and carried it up tlie beach above high-water mark. Maxim turned to me, laughing, wiping the hair out of his eyes, and I unrolled the sleeves of my mackintosh caught by the sea spray. And then we looked round, and saw that Jasper had disappeared. We called and whistled, and he did not come. I looked anxiously towards the mouth of the cove where the waves were breaking upon the rocks.
said Maxim, “we should have seen him, he can’t have fallen. Jasper, you idiot, where are you? Jasper, Jasper?”
“Perhaps he’s gone back to the Happy Valley?” I said.
“He was by that rock a minute ago, snijBfing a dead seagull,” said Maxim.
We walked up the beach towards the valley once again.
“Jasper, Jasper?” called Maxim.
In the distance, beyond the rocks to the right of the beach, I heard a short, sharp bark. “Hear that?” I said. “He’s chmbed over this way.” I began to scramble up the slippery rocks in the direction of the bark.
“Come back,” said Maxim sharply, “we don’t want to go that way. The fool of a dog must look after himself.”
I hesitated, looking down from my rock. “Perhaps he’s fallen,” I said, “poor little chap. Let me fetch him.” Jasper barked again, further away this time. “Oh, listen,” I said,
“I must get him. It’s quite safe, isn’t it? The tide won’t have cut him ofF?”
“He’s all right,” said Maxim irritably, “why not leave him? He knows his own way back.”
I pretended not to hear, and began scrambling over the rocks towards Jasper, Great jagged boulders screened the view, and I slipped and stumbled on the wet rocks, making my way as best I could in Jasper’s direction. It was heartless of Maxim to leave Jasper, I thought, and I could not understand it. Besides, the tide was coming in. I came up beside the big boulder that had hidden the view, and looked beyond it. And I saw, to my surprise, that I was looking down into another cove, similar to the one I had left, but wider and more rounded. A small stone breakwater had been
tlirown out across tli© cov© for shelter, and behind it the bay formed a tiny natural harbour. There was a buoy anchored there, but no boat. The beach in the cove was whit© shingle, like the one behind me, but steeper, shelving suddenly to the sea. The woods cam© right down to the tangle of seaweed marking high water, encroaching almost to the rocks themselves, and at the fringe of the woods was a long low building, hah cottage, half boat-house, built of the same stone as the breakwater.
There was a man on the beach, a fisherman perhaps, in long boots and a souVester, and Jasper was harking at him, running round him in circles, darting at his hoots. The man took no notice, he was bending down, and scraping in the shingle. I shouted, “Jasper, come her©.'^ The dog looked up, wagging his tail, but he did not obey me. He went on baiting the solitary figure on the beach.
I looked over my shoulder. There was still no sign of Maxim, I climbed down over the rocks to the beach below. My feet made a crunching noise across the shingle, and the man looked up at the sound. I saw then that he had the small slit eyes of an idiot, and the red, wet mouth. He smiled at me, showing toothless gums.
"G^day,"' he said. “‘Dirty, ain’t it?”
“Good afternoon,” I said “No, Tm afraid it’s not very nice weather.”
He watched me with interest, smiling aU the while. “Diggin’ for shell,” he said. “No shell here. Been diggin’ since forenoon.”
“Oh,” I said, “I’m sorry you can’t find any.”
“That’s right,” he said, “no shell here.”
“Come on, Jasper,” I said, “it’s getting late. Come on, old boy.”
But Jasper was in an infuriating mood. Perhaps the wind and sea had gone to his head, for he backed away from me, barking stupidly, and began racing round the beach after nothing at all. I saw he would never follow me, and I had no lead, I turned to the man, who had bent down again to his futile disusing.
‘‘Have you got any string?"’ I said.
“Eh?"" he said.
“Have you got any string?” I repeated.
“No shell here,” he said, shaking his head. “Been diggin" since forenoon.” He nodded his head at me, and wiped his pale blue watery eyes.
“I want something to tie the dog,” I said. “He won’t follow me.”
“Eh?” he said. And he smiled his poor idiot’s smile.
“AE right,” I said, “it doesn’t matter.” He looked at me uncertainly, and then leant forward, and poked me in the chest.
“I know that dog,” he said, “he comes fro’ the house.”
“Yes,” I said. “I want him to come back with me now.”
“He’s not yoxurn,” he said.
“He’s Mr. de Winter’s dog,” I said gently. “I want to take him back to the house.”
“Eh?” he said.
I called Jasper once more, but he was chasing a feather blown by the wind. I wondered if there was any string in the boat-house, and I walked up the beach towards it. There must have been a garden once, but now the grass was long and overgrown, crowded with nettles. The windows were boarded up. No doubt the door was locked, and I lifted the latch without much hope. To my surprise it opened after the first stiffness, and I went inside, bending my head because of the low door. I expected to find the usual boat store, dirty and dusty with disuse, ropes and blocks and oars upon the floor. The dust was there, and the dirt too in places, but there were no ropes or blocks. The room was furnished, and ran the whole length of the cottage. There was a desk in the corner, a table, and chairs, and a bed-sofa pushed against the wall. There was a dresser too, with cups and plates. standing on the top of the shelves. For a moment I thought it must be inhabited — perhaps the poor man on the beach lived here ^but I looked around me again, and saw no sign of recent occupation. That rusted srrate knew na fina tKic
dusty floor no footsteps, and the china there on the dresser was blue-spotted with the damp. There was a queer musty smell about the place. Cobwebs spun threads upon the ship's models, making their own ghostly rigging. No one lived here. No one came here. The door had creaked on its hinges when I opened it. The rain pattered on ibe roof with a hollow sound, and tapped upon the boarded windows. The fabric of the sofa-bed had been nibbled by mice or rats. I could see the jagged holes, and the frayed edges. It was damp in the cottage, damp and chill. Dark, and oppressive.
I did not Hke it. I had no wish to stay there. I hated the hollow sound of the rain pattering on the roof. It seemed to echo in the room itself, and I heard the water dripping too into the rusted grate.
I looked about me for some string. There was nothing that would serve my purpose, nothing at all. There was another door at the end of the room, and I went to it, and opened it, a Htde fearful now, a little afraid, for I had the odd, uneasy feeling that I might come upon something unawares, that I had no wish to see. Something that might harm me, that might be horrible.
It was nonsense of course, and I opened the door. It was only a boat store after all. Here were the ropes and blocks I had expected, two or three sails, fenders, a small punt, pots of paints, all the litter and junk that goes "with the using of boats. A baU of twine lay on a shelf, a rusted clasp-knife beside it. This would be all I needed for Jasper. I opened the knife, and cut a length of twine, and came back into the room again. The rain stiU fell upon the roof, and into the grate. I came out of the cottage hurriedly, not looking behind me, trying not to see the torn sofa and the mildewed china, the spun cobwebs on the model ships, and so through the creaking gate and on to the white beach.
The man was not digging any more, h© was watching me, Jasper at bis side.
'^Come along, Jasper,” I said, "home on, good dog.” I bent down, and this time he allowed me to touch him and pull
hold of his collar. "1 found some string in the cottage I said to the man.
He did not answer, and I tied the string loosely round Jasper's collar.
“Good afternoon, I said, tugging at Jasper. The man nodded, staring at me with his narrow idiot's eyes. I saw e© go m yonder, he said.
“Yes,” I said, “its all right. Mr. de Winter won't mind."
“She don't go in there now," he said.
“No,” I said, “not now.”
“She's gone in the sea, ain't she?” he said, “she won't come hack no more."
“No I said, “shell not come back.”
“I never said nothing, did I?” he said.
“No, of course not, don't worry,” I said.
He bent down again to his digging, muttering to himself. I went across the shingle and I saw Maxim waiting for me by the rocks, his hands in his pockets.
“I'm sorry,” I said. “Jasper would not come. I had to get some string.”
He turned abruptly on his heel, and made towards the woods.
“Aren't we going back over the rocks?” I said.
“What's the point, we're here now,” he said briefly.
We went up past the cottage and struck into a path through the woods. “I'm sorry I was such a time, it was Jasper's fault,” I said, “he kept barking at the man. Who was he?”
“Only Ben,” said Maxim; “he's quite harmless, poor devil. His old father used to be on© of the keepers, they live near the home farm. Where did you get that piece of twine?”
“I found it in the cottage on the beach," I said.
“Was the door open?" he asked.
“Yes, I pushed it open. I found the string in the other room, where the sails were, and a small boat.”
“Oh,” he said shortly. “Oh, I see,” and then he added, after a moment or two: “That cottage is supposed to be locked, the door has no business to be open.”
I said nothing, it was not my affair.
"Did Ben tell you the door was open?”
"No,” I said, "he did not seem to understand anything I asked him.”
"He makes out he^s worse than he is,” said Maxim. "He can talk quite intelligibly if he wants to. He's probably been in and out of the cottage dozens of times, and did not want you to know.”
"I don't think so,” I answered; "the place looked deserted, quite untouched. There was dust everywhere, and no footmarks. It was terribly damp. Tm afraid those hooks will be quite spoilt, and the chairs, and that sofa. There are rats there too, they have eaten away some of the covers.”
Maxim did not reply. He walked at a tremendous pace, and the climb up from the beach was steep. It was very different from the Happy Valley. The trees were dark here and close together, there were no azaleas brushing the path. The rain dripped heavily from the thick branches. It splashed on my collar and trickled down my neck. I shivered, it was unpleasant, like a cold finger. My legs ached, after the unaccustomed scramble over the rocks. And Jasper lagged behind, weary from his wild scamper, his tongue hanging from his mouth.
"Come on, Jasper, for God's sake,” said Maxim. "Make him walk up, pull at the twine or something, can't you? Beatrice was right. The dog is much too fat.”
"It's your fault,” I said, "you walk so fast. We can't keep up with you.”
"If you had listened to me instead of rushing wildly over those rocks we would have been home by now,” said Maxim,
"Jasper knew his way back perfectly. I can't think what you wanted to go after him for.”
"I thought he might have fallen, and I was afraid of the tide,” I said.
"Is it Bkely I should have left the dog had there been any question of the tide?” said Maxim. "I told you not to go on those rocks, and now you are grumbling because you are tired.”
"I'm not grumbling,” I said. "Anyone, even if they had
legs of iron, would be tired walking at this pace. I thought you would come with me when I went after Jasper anyway, instead of staying behind.”
‘‘Why should I exhaust myself careering after the damn dog^” he said.
“It was no more exhausting careenng after Jasper on the rocks than it was careering after driftwood on the beach,'’ I answered. “You just say that because you have not any other excuse.”
“My good child, what am I supposed to excuse myself about?”
“Oh, I don't know,” I said wearily, ‘let's stop this.”
“Not at all, you began it. What do you mean by saying I was trying to find an excuse? Excuse for what?”
“Excuse for not having come with me over the rocks, I suppose,” I said.
“Well, and why do you think I did not want to cross to the other beach?”
“Oh, Maxim, how should I know? I'm not a thought-reader. I know you did not want to, that's all. I could see it in your face.”
“See what in my face?”
“I’ve already told you. I could see you did not want to go. Oh, do let's have an end to it. I'm sick to death of the subject.”
“All women say that when they've lost an argument. All right, I did not want to go to the other beach. Will that please you? I never go near the bloody place, or that God-damned cottage. And if you had my memories you would not want to go there either, or talk about it, or even think about it. There. You can digest that if you like, and I hope it satisfies you.”
His face was white, and his eyes strained and wretched with that dark lost look they had had when I first met him. I put out my hand to him, I took hold of his, holding it tight.
“Please, Maxim, please,” I said.
“What's the matter?” he said roughly.
“I don't want you to look like that,” I said. “It hurts too much. Please, Maxim. Let's forget all we said. A futile silly
argument. I’m sorry, darling, Tm sorry. Please let everytibing be all right.”
“We ought to have stayed in Italy,” he said. “We ought never to have come back to Manderley. Oh, God, what a fool I was to come back.”
He brushed through the trees impatiently, striding even faster than before, and I had to run to keep pace wiih him, catching at my breath, tears very near the surface, dragging poor Jasper after me on the end of his string.
At last we came to the top of the path, and I saw its fellow branching left to the Happy Vahey. We had climbed the path then that Jasper had wished to take at the beginning of the afternoon. I knew now why Jasper had turned to it. It led to the beach he knew best, and the cottage. It was his old routine.
We came out on to the lawns, and went across them to the house without a word. Maximus face was hard, with no expression. He went straight into the hall and on to the library without looking at me. Frith was in the hall.
“We want tea at once,” said Maxim, and he shut the library door.
I fought to keep back my tears. Frith must not see them. He would think we had been quarrelling, and he would go to the servants’ hall and say to them all, “Mrs. de Winter was crying in the hall just now. It looks as though things are not going very well.” I turned away, so that Frith should not see my face. He came towards me though, he began to help me oflE with my mackintosh.
“Ill put your raincoat away for you in the flower-room. Madam,” he said.
“Thank you, Frith,” I replied, my face still away from him.
“Not a very pleasant afternoon for a walk I fear, Madam.”
“No,” I said. “No, it was not very nice.”
“Your handkerchief, Madam?” he said, picking up something that had fallen on the floor. “Thank you,” I said, putting it in my pocket.
I was wondering whether to go upstairs or whether to follow Maxim to the library. Frith took the coat to the flower-
room. I stood there, hesitating, biting my nails. Frith came back again. He looked surprised to see me still there.
"There is a good fire in the library now. Madam’
"Thank you, Frith,” I said.
I walked slowly across the hall to the library. I opened the door and went in. Maxim was sitting in his chair, Jasper at his feet, the old dog in her basket. Maxim was not reading the paper, though it lay on the arm of the chair beside him. I went and knelt down by his side and put my face close to his,
"Don’t be angry with me any more,” I whispered.
He took my face in his hands, and looked down at me with his tired, strained eyes. Tm not angry with you,” he said.
"Yes,” I said. "I’ve made you unhappy. It’s the same as making you angry. You’re all wounded and hurt and tom inside. I can’t bear to see you Hke this. I love you so much.”
"Do you?” he said. "Do you?” He held me very tight, and his eyes questioned me, dark and uncertain, the eyes of a child in pain, a child in fear.
"What IS it, darling?” I said "Why do you look like that?”
I heard the door open before he could answer, and I sank back on my heels, pretending to reach for a log to throw on the fire, while Frith came into the room followed by Robert, and the ritual of our tea began.
The performance of the day before was repeated, the placing of the table, the laying of the snow-white cloth, the putting down of cakes and crumpets, the silver kettle of hot water placed on its little flame, while Jasper, wagging his tail, his ears stretched back in anticipation, watched my face. Five minutes must have passed before we were alone again, and when I looked at Maxim I saw the colour had come back into his face, the tired, lost look was gone, and he was reaching for a sandwich.
"Having all that crowd to lunch was the trouble,” he said.
"Poor old Beatrice always does rub me up the wrong way. We used to scrap hke dogs as children. Tm so fond of her too, bless her. Such a relief though that they don’t live too near. Which reminds me, we’ll have to go over and see
Granny some time. Pour out my tea, sweetheart, and forgive me for being a bear to you."’
It was over then. The episode was finished. We must not speak of it again. He smiled at me over his cup of tea, and then reached for the newspaper on the arm of his chair. The smile was my reward. Like a pat on the head to Jasper. Good dog then, lie down, don^’t worry me any more. I was Jasper again. I was back where I had been before, I took a piece of crumpet and divided it between the two dogs. I did not want it myself, I was not hungry. I felt very weak now, very tired in a dull, spent way. I looked at Maxim but he was reading his paper, he had folded it over to another page. My fingers were messy with the butter from the crumpet, and I felt in my pocket for a handkerchief. I drew it out, a tiny scrap of a thing, lace-edged. I stared at it, frowning, for it was not mine. I remembered then that Frith had picked it up from the stone floor of the hall. It must have fallen out of the pocket in the mackintosh. I turned it over in my hand. It was grubby, little bits of fluflF from the pocket clung to it. It must have been in the mackintosh pocket for a long time. There was a monogram in the comer. A tall sloping R, with the letters de W interlaced. The R dwarfed the other letters, the tail of it ran down into the cambric, away from the laced edge. It was only a small handkerchief, quite a scrap of a thing. It had been rolled m a ball and put away in the pocket and forgotten.
I must have been the first person to put on that mackintosh since the handkerchief was used. She who had worn the coat then was tall, slim, broader than I about the shoulders, for I had found it big and over-long, and the sleeves had come below my wrists. Some of the buttons were missing. She had not bothered to do it up. She had thrown it over her shoulders like a cape, or worn it loose, hanging open, her hands deep in the pockets.
There was a pink mark upon the handkerchief. The mark of lip-stick. She had rubbed her lips with the handkerchief, and then roiled it in a baJI, and left it in the pocket. I wiped
my fingers with the handkerchief, and as I did so I noticed that a dull scent clung about it still.
A scent I recognised, a scent I knew. I shut my eyes and tried to remember. It was something elusive, something faint and fragrant that I could not name. I had breathed it before, touched it surely, that very afternoon.
And then I knew that the vanished scent upon the handkerchief was the same as the crushed white petals of the azaleas in the Happy Valley.
The weather was wet and cold for quite a week, as it often can be in the west country in early summer, and we did not go down to the beach again. I could see the sea from the terrace, and the lawns. It looked grey and iminviting, great rollers sweeping in to the bay past the beacon on the headland. I pictured them surging into the httle cove and breaking with a roar upon the rocks, then running swift and strong to the shelving beach. If I stood on the terrace and listened I could hear the murmur of the sea below me, low and sullen. A dull, persistent sound that never ceased. And the gulls flew inland too,^ driven by the weather. They hovered above the house in circles, wheeling and crying, flapping their spread wings. I began to understand why some people could not bear the clamour of the sea. It has a mournful harping note sometimes, and the very persistence of it, that eternal roll and thunder and hiss, plays a jagged tune upon the nerves. I was glad oirr rooms were in the east wing and I could lean out of my window and look down upon the rose-garden. For sometimes I could not sleep, and getting softly out of bed in the
quiet of the night I would wander to the window, and lean there, my arms upon the sill, and the air would be very peaceful, very still.
I could not hear the restless sea, and because I could not hear it my thoughts would be peaceful too. They would not carry me down that steep path through the woods to the grey cove and the deserted cottage. I did not want to think about the cottage. I remembered it too often in the day. The memory of it nagged at me whenever I saw the sea from the terrace. For I would see once more the blue spots on the china, the spun webs on the httle masts of those model ships, and the rat holes on the sofa-bed. I would remember the pattering of the rain on the roof. And I thought of Ben, too, with his narrow watery blue eyes, his sly idiofs smile. These things disturbed me, I was not happy about them. I wanted to forget them but at the same time I wanted to know why they disturbed me, why they made me uneasy and unhappy. Somewhere, at the back of my mind, there was a frightened furtive seed of curiosity that grew slowly and stealthily, for all my denial of it, and I knew all the doubt and the anxiety of the child who has been told, ‘‘these things are not discussed, they are forbidden,” I could not forget the white, lost look in Maximus eyes when we came up the path through the woods, and I could not forget his words, “Oh, God, what a fool I was to come back.” It was all my fault, because I had gone down into the bay, I had opened up a road into the past again. And although Maxim had recovered, and was himself again, and we lived our lives together, sleeping, eating, walking, writing letters, driving to the village, working hour by hour through our day, I knew there was a barrier between us because of it.
He walked alone, on the other side, and I must not come to him. And I became nervous and fearful that some heedless word, some tom in a careless conversation should bring that expression back to his eyes again. I began to dread any mention of the sea, for the sea might lead to boats, to accidents, to drowning.... Even Frank Crawley, who came to lunch one day, put me in a Htide fever of fear when he said some-
tiling about tbe sailing races in Kerritb harbour, three miles away. I looked steadily at my plate, a stab of sickness m my heart at once, but Maxim went on talking quit© naturally, he did not seem to mind, while I sat in a sweat of uncertainty wondering what would happen and where the conversation would lead us.
It was during cheese, Frith had left the room, and I remember getting up and going to the side-board, and taking some more cheese, not wanting it, so as not to be at the table with them, listening; humming a htde tune to myself so I could not hear. I was wrong of course, morbid, stupid; this was the hyper-sensitive behaviour of a neurotic, not the normal happy self I knew myself to be. But I could not help it. I did not know what to do. My shyness and gaucherie became worse, too, making me stolid and dumb when people cam© to the house. For w© were called upon, I remember, during those first weeks, by people who lived near us in the county, and the receiving of them, and the shaking hands, and the spinning out of the formal half-hour became a worse ordeal than I first anticipated, because of this new fear of mine that they would talk about something that must not be discussed. The agony of those wheels on the drive, of that pealing bell, of my own first wild rush for flight to my own room. The scrambled dab of powder on my nose, the hasty comb through my hair, and then the inevitable knock on the door and the entrance of the cards on a silver tray.
'‘All right, ril be down immediately.'' The clap of my heels on the stairs and across the hall, the opening of the library door or, worse still, that long, cold, lifeless drawing-room, and the strange woman waiting there, or two of them perhaps, or a husband and wife.
"How do you do? Tm so sorry, Maxim is in the garden somewhere. Frith has gone to find him.”
"We felt we must come and pay our respects to the bride.”
A little laughter, a little flurry o£ chat, a pause, a glance round the room.
"Manderley is looking as charming as ever. DonT you love it?”
"'Oh, yes, rather.. And in my shyness and anxiety to please, those schoolgirl phrases would escape from me again, those words I never used except in moments like these, “Oh, ripping”, and “Oh, topping”; and “absolutely”; and “priceless”; even, I think, to one dowager who had carried a lorgnette, “cheerio.” My relief at Maxim’s arrival would be tempered by the fear that they might say something indiscreet, and I became dumb at once, a set smile on my lips, my hands in my lap. They would turn to Maxim then, talking of people and places I had not met or did not know, and now and again I would find their eyes upon me, doubtful, rather bewildered.
I could picture them saying to one another as they drove away, “My dear, what a dull girl. She scarcely opened her mouth”; and then the sentence I had first heard upon Beatrice’s Hps, haunting me ever since, a sentence I read in every eye, on every tongue~-“She’s so different to Rebecca.”
Sometimes I would glean little snatches of information to add to my secret store. A word dropped here at random, a question, a passing phrase. And, if Maxim was not with me, the hearing of them would be a furtive, rather painful pleasure, guilty knowledge learnt in the dark.
I would return a call perhaps, for Maxim was punctilious in these matters and would not spare me, and if he did not come with me I must brave the formality alone, and there would be a pause in the conversation while I searched for something to say. “Will you be entertaining much at Manderley, Mrs. de Winter?” they would say and my answer would come, “I don’t; know, Maxim has not said much about it up to the present.” “No, of course not, it’s early yet, I believe the house was generally full of people in the old days.” Another pause. “People from London, you know. There used to be tremendous parties.” “Yes,” I would say. “Yes, so I have heard.” A further pause, and then the lowered voice that is always used about the dead or in a place of worship, “She was so tremendously popular, you know. Such a personality.”
“Yes,” I would say. “Yes, of course.” And after a moment or
SO 1 would glance at my watch under cover of my glove, and say: “fm afraid I ought to be going, it must be after four’
“Won t you stay for tea? We always have it quarter-past.”
“No— no, really, thanlcs most awfully. I promised Maxim.. My sentence would go traihng oflE into nothing, but the meaning would be understood. We would both rise to our feet, both of us knowing I was not deceived about her oiGEer to tea nor she in my mention of a promise to Maxim. I so-metimes wondered what would happen if convention were denied, if, having got into the oar and waved a hand to my hostess on the doorstep, I suddenly opened it again, and said, “I don’t think TU go back after all. Let’s go to your drawing-room again and sit dovm. Ill stay to dinner if you like or stop the night.”
I used to wonder if convention and good county manners would brave the surprise, and whether a smile of welcome would be summoned to the frozen face. “But of course! How very delightful of you to suggest it.” I used to wish I had the courage to try. But instead the door would slam, the car would go bowling away down the smooth gravel drive, and my late hostess would wander back to her room with a sigh of relief and become herself again. It was the wife of the bishop in the neighbouring cathedral town who said to me,
“Will your husband revive the Manderley fancy dress ball, do you suppose? Such a lovely sight always, I shall never forget It.”
I had to smile as though I knew all about it and say, “We have not decided. There have been so many ihings to do and to discuss.”
“Yes, I suppose so. But I hope it won't he dropped. You must use your influence with him. There was not one last year of course. But I remember two years ago, the bishop and I went, and it was quite enchanting. Manderley so lends itself to anything like that. The hall looked wonderful. They danced there, and had the music in the gallery, it was all so in keeping. A tremendous thing to organise but everybody appreciated it so.”
“Yes,” I said. “Yes, I must ask Maxim about it”
I thouglit of the docketed pigeon-holes in the desk in the morning-room, I pictured the stack upon stack of invitation cards, the long list of names, the addresses, and I could see a woman sitting there at the desk and putting a V beside the names she wanted, and reaching for the invitation cards, dipping her pen in the ink, writing upon them swift and sure in that long, slanting hand.
“There was a garden party, too, we went to one summer,” said the bishop^s wife. “Everything always so beautifully done. The flowers at their best. A glorious day I remember. Tea was served at little tables in the rose-garden, such an attractive original idea. Of course, she was so clever..
She stopped, turning a little pink, fearing a loss of tact, but I agreed with her at once to save embarrassment, and I heard myself saying, boldly, brazenly, “Rebecca must have been a wonderful person.”
I could not believe that I had said the name at last. I waited, wondering what would happen. I had said the name. I had said the word Rebecca aloud. It was a tremendous relief. It was as though I had taken a purge and rid myself of an intolerable pain. Rebecca. I had said it aloud.
I wondered if the bishop's wife saw the flush on my face, but she went on smoothly with the conversation, and I listened to her greedily, like an eavesdropper at a shuttered window.
“You never met her then?” she asked, and when I shook my head she hesitated a moment, a httle uncertain of her ground, “We never knew her well personally, you know, the bishop was only inducted here four years ago, but of course she received us when we went to the ball and to the garden party. We dined there, too, one winter. Yes, she was a very lovely creature. So full of life.”
“She seems to have been so good at everything too,” I said, my voice just careless enough to show I did not mind, while I played with the fringe of my glove. “It's not often you get someone who is clever and beautiful and fond of sport.”
“No, I suppose you don't,” said the bishop's wife; “she was certainly very gifted. I can see her now, standing at the foot
of the stairs on the night of the hail, shaking hands with everybody, that cloud of dark hair against the very white skin, and her costume suited her so. Yes, she was very beautiful.’^
‘‘She ran the house herself, too^ I said, smiling, as if to say,
“I am quite at my ease, I often discuss her' “It must have taken a lot of time and thought Tm afraid I leave it to the housekeeper.”
“Oh, well, wo can’t ah do everything. And you are very young, aren’t you? No doubt in time, when you have settled down. Besides, you have your own hobby, haven’t you? Someone told me you were fond of sketching.”
“Oh, that,” I said. “I don’t know that I can count it for much.”
“It’s a nice little talent to have,” said the bishop’s wife;
“it’s not everyone that can sketch. You must not drop it. Manderley must be full of pretty spots to sketch.”
Yes,” I said. “Yes, I suppose so,” depressed by her words, having a sudden vision of myself wandering across the lawns with a camp-stool and a box of pencils under one arm, and my “little talent” as she described it, under the other. It sounded like a pet disease.
“Do you play any games, do you ride, or shoot?” she asked.
“No,” I said, “I don’t do anything like that. I’m fond of walking,” I added, as a wretched anti-chmax.
“The best exercise in the world,” she said briskly, “the bishop and I walk a lot.” I wondered if he went round and round the cathedral, in his shovel hat and his gaiters, with her on his arm. She began to talk about a walking holiday they had taken once, years ago, in the Pennines, how they had done an average of twenty miles a day, and I nodded my bead, smiling politely, wondering about the Pennines, thinking they were something like the Andes, remembering afterwards they were that chain of hills marked with a furry hne in the middle of a pink England on my school atlas. And he all the time in his hat and gaiters.
The inevitable pause, the glance at the watch unnecessary, as hei drawing-room clock chimed four in shrill tones, and
my rise from the chair. ‘Tm so glad I found you in, I hope you will come and see us
''We should love to. The bishop is always so busy, alas. Please remember me to your husband, and be sure to ask him to revive the ball.”
“Yes, indeed I will.” Lying, pretending I knew all about it; and in the car going home I sat in my comer, biting my thumb nail, seeing the great hall at Manderley thronged with people m fancy dress, the chatter, hum, and laughter of the moving crowd, the musicians in the gallery, supper in the drawing-room probably, long bufEet tables against the wall, and I could see Maxim standing at the foot of the stairs, laughing, shaking hands, turmng to someone who stood by his side, tall and slim, with dark hair, said the bishop’s wife, dark hair against a white face, someone whose quick eyes saw to the comfort of her guests, who gave an order over her shoulder to a servant, someone who was never awkward, never without grace, who when she danced left a stab of perfume in the air like a white azalea.
“Will you be entertaining much at Manderley, Mrs. de Winter?” I heard the voice again, suggestive, rather inquisitive, in the voice of that woman I had called upon who lived the other side of Kerrith, and I saw her eye too, dubious, considering, taking in my clothes from top to toe, wondering, with that swift downward glance given to all brides, if I was going to have a baby.
I did not want to see her again. I did not want to see any of them again. They only came to call at Manderley because they were curious and prying. They liked to criticise my looks, my manners, my figure, they liked to watch how Maxim and I behaved to each other, whether we seemed fond of one another, so that they could go back afterwards and discuss us, saying, “Very diflFerent from the old days.” They came because they wanted to compare me to Rebecca.... I would not return these calls any more, I decided, I should tell Maxim so. I did not mind if they thought me rude and ungracious. It would give them more to criticise, more to discuss They could say I was ill-bred. “I’m not surprised,” they would say.
''after all, wlio was slie?'' And then a laugh and a shrug of the shoulder. "My dear, don'^t you know? He picked her up in Mont© Carlo or somewhere, she hadn’t a penny. She was a companion to some old woman.” More laughter, more lifting of the eyebrows. "Nonsense, not really? How extraordinary men are, Maxim, of all people, who was so fastidious. How could he, after Rebecca?”
I did not mind. I did not care. They could say what they liked. As the car turned in at the lodge gates I leant forward in my seat to smile at the woman who lived there. She was bending down, picking flowers in the front garden. She straightened up as she heard the car, but she did not see me smile. I waved, and she stared at me blankly. I don’t think she knew who I was. I leant back in my seat again. The car went on down the drive.
When we turned at on© of the narrow bends I saw a man walking along the drive a little distance ahead. It was the agent, Frank Crawley. He stopped when he heard the car, and the chauffeur slowed down. Frank Crawley took off his hat and smiled when he saw me in the car. He seemed glad to see me. I smiled back at him. It was nice of him to be glad to see me. I Kked Frank Crawley. I did not find him dull or uninteresting as Beatrice had done. Perhaps it was because I was dull myself. We were both dull. W© neither of us had a word to say for ourselves. Like to like.
I tapped on the glass and told the chauffeur to stop.
"I think rU get out and walk with Mr. Crawley,” I said.
He opened the door for me. "Been paying calls, Mrs. de Winter?” he said.
"Yes, Frank,” I said, I called him Frank because Maxim did, but he would always call me Mrs. de Winter. Ho was that sort of person. Even if w© had been thrown on a desert island together, and lived there in intimacy for the rest of our lives, I should have been Mrs. d© Winter.
'Tv© been calling on the bishop,” I said, "and I found the bishop out but the bishop s lady was at home. She and the bishop are very fond of walking. Sometimes they do twenty miles a day, in the Pennines.”
‘1 don’t know that part of th© world’ said Frank Crawley,
‘‘they say the country round is very fine. An uncle of min© used to live there’ It was the sort of remark Frank Crawley always made. Safe, conventional, very correct.
“The bishop’s wife wants to know when we are going to give a fancy dress ball at Manderley,” I said, watching him out of the tail of my eye. “She came to the last one, she said, and enjoyed it very much. I did not know you have fancy dress dances here, Frank.”
He hesitated a moment before replying. He looked a Httl© troubled. “Oh, yes,” he said after a moment, “the Manderley ball was generally an annual affair. Everyone in the county came. A lot of people from London too. Quite a big show.”
“It must have taken a lot of organisation,” I said.
“Yes,” he said.
“I suppose,” I said carelessly, “Rebecca did most of it?”
I looked straight ahead of me along the drive, but I could see his face was turned towards me, as though he wished to read my expression.
“W© all of us worked pretty hard,” he said quietly.
There was a funny reserve in his manner as he said ihis, ■a certain shyness that reminded me of my own. I wondered suddenly if he had been in love with Rebecca. His voice was the sort of voice I should have used in his circumstances, had this been so. The idea opened up a new field of possibilities, Frank Crawley being so shy, so dull. He would never have told anyone, least of al Rebecca.
“I’m afraid I should not be much use if we have a dance,” I said, “I’m no earthly use at organising anything.”
“There would be no need for you to do anything,” he said,
“you would just be yourself and look decorative.”
“That’s very polite of you, Frank,” I said, “but I’m afraid I should not be able to do that very well either.”
“I think you would do it excellently,” he said. Dear Frank Crawley, how tactful he was and considerate. I almost believed him. But he did not deceive me really.
“WiU you ask Maxim about the ball?” I said.
“Why don't you ask him?" he answered.
“No," I said. “No, I don't like to."
We were silent then. We went on walking along the drive. Now that I had broken down my reluctance at saying Rebecca's name, first wdth the bishop's wife and now with Frank Crawley, the urge to continue was strong within me. It gave me a curious satisfaction, it acted upon me hke a stimulant. I knew that in a moment or two I should have to say it again.
“I was down on one of the beaches the other day," I said,
“the one with the breakwater. Jasper was being infuriating, he kept barking at the poor man with the idiot's eyes."
“You must mean Ben," said Frank, his voice quite easy now, “he always potters about on the shore. He's quite a nice fellow, you need never be frightened of him. He would not hurt a fly.'’
“Oh, I wasn’t frightened," I said. I waited a moment, humming a tune to give me confidence. “I'm afraid that cottage place is going to rack and ruin," I said lightly. “I had to go in to find a piece of string or something to tie up Jasper. The china is mouldy and the hooks are being ruined. Why isn't something done about? It seems such a pity."
I knew he would not answer at once. He bent down to tie up his shoe lace.
I pretended to examine a leaf on one of the shrubs. “I think if Maxim wanted anything done he would teH me," he said, still fumbling with his shoe.
“Are they all Rebecca's things?" I asked.
“Yes,” he said.
I threw the leaf away and picked another, turning it over in my hands.
“What did she use the cottage for?" I asked. “It looked quite furnished. I thought from the outside it was just a boathouse."
“It was a boat-house originally," he said, his voice constrained again, diiBBcult, the voice of someone who is uncomfortable about his subject. “Then— then she converted it like that, had furniture put in, and china.”
I thought it funny the way he called her "‘she.” He did not say Rebecca or Mrs. de Winter, as I expected him to do.
“Did she us© it a great deal?” I asked.
“Yes,” he said. “Yes, she did. Moonlight picnics, and— and one thing and another.”
We were walking again side by side, I still humming my Mttle tune. “How jolly,” I said brightly, “moonlight picnics must be great fun. Did you ever go to them?”
“Once or twice,” he said. I pretended not to notice his manner, how quiet it had become, how reluctant to speak about these things.
“Why is the buoy there in the little harbour place?” I said.
“The boat used to be moored there,” hp said.
“What boat?” I asked.
“Her boat,” he said.
A strange sort of excitement was upon me. I had to go on with my questions. He did not want to talk about it, I knew that, but although I was sorry for him and shocked at my own self I had to continue, I could not be silent.
“What happened to it?” I said. “Was that the boat she was sailing when she was drownedF’
“Yes,” he said quietly, “it capsized and sank. She was washed overboard.”
“What sort of size boat was it?’^ I asked.
“About three tons. It had a little cabin.”
“Wbat made it capsizeF^ I said.
“It can be very squally in the bay,” he said, I thought of that green sea, foam-flecked, that ran down channel beyond the headland. Did the wind come suddenly, I wondered, in a funnel from the beacon bn the hill, and did the little boat heel to it, shivering, the white sail flat against a breaking sea.
“Could not someone have got out to her?” I said.
“Nobody saw the accident, nobody knew she had gone,” he said.
I was very careful not to look at him. He might have seen the surprise in my face. I had always thought it happened in a sailing race, £bat other boats were there, the boats from
Kerrith, and that people were watching, from the clijffs. I did not know she had been alone. Quite alone, out there in the bay.
“They must have known up at the house?’" I said.
“No,” he said. “She often went out alone like that. She would come back any time of mght, and sleep at the cottage on the beach.”
“Was she not nervous?”
“Nervous?” he said. “No, she was not nervous of anything.”
“Did— did Maxim mind her going off alone like that?”
He waited a minute, and then “I don’t know,” he said shortly. I had the impression he was being loyal to someone. Either to Maxim or to Rebecca, or perhaps even to himself. He was odd. I did not know what to make of it.
“She must have been drowned then, trying to swim to shore, after the boat sank?” I said.
“Yes,” he said.
I knew how the little boat would quiver and plunge, the water gushing into the steering well, and how the sails would press her down, suddenly, horribly, in that gust of wind. It must have been very dark out there in the bay. The shore must have seemed very far away to anyone swimming there, in the water.
“How long afterwards was it that they found her?” I said.
“About two months,” he said.
Two months. I thought drowned people were found after two days. I thought they would be washed up close to the shore, when the tide came.
“Where did they find her?” I asked.
“Near Edgecoombe, about forty miles up channel,” he said.
I had spent a holiday at Edgecoombe once, when I was seven. It was a big place, with a pier, and donkeys. I remembered riding a donkey along the sands.
“How did they know it was her, after two months, how could they tell?” I said. I wondered why he paused before each sentence, as though he weighed his words. Had he cared for her then, had he minded so much?
“Maxim went up to Edgecoombe to identify her,” he said.
Suddenly I did not want to ask him any more. I felt sick at myself, sick and disgusted. I was like a curious sight-seer standing on the fringe of a crowd after someone had been knocked down. I felt like a poor person in a tenement building, when someone has died, asking if I might see the body. I hated myself. My questions had been degrading, shameful. Frank Crawley must despise me.
'It was a terrible time for aU of you' I said rapidly, "I don’t suppose you like being reminded about it. I just wondered if there was anything one could do to the cottage, that’s all. It seems such a pity, all the furniture being spoilt by the damp.”
He did not say anything. I felt hot and uncomfortable. He must have sensed that it was not concern for the empty cottage that had prompted me to ask these questions, and now he was silent because he was shocked at me. Ours had been a comfortable, steady sort of friendship. I had felt him an ally. Perhaps I had destroyed all this, and he would never feel the same about me again.
"What a long drive this is,” I said. "It always reminds me of the path in the forest in a Grimm’s fairy tale, where the prince gets lost, you know. It’s always longer than on© expects, and the trees are so dark, and close,”
"Yes, it is rather exceptional,” he said.
I could tell by his manner he was still on his guard, as though waiting for a further question from me. There was an awkwardness between us that could not be ignored. Something bad to be done about it, even if it covered me with shame.
"Frank,” I said desperately, "I know what you are thinking. You can’t understand why I asked all those questions just now. You think I’m morbid, and curious, In a rather beastly way. It’s not that, I promise you. It’s only that— that sometimes I feel myself at such a disadvantage. It’s all very strange to me, living here at Manderley. Not the sort of hfe I’ve been brought up to. When I go returning these calls, as I did this afternoon, I know people are looking me up and down, wondering what sort of success I’m going to make of it. I can
imagine them saying, ‘What on earth does Maxim see in her? And then, Frank, I begin to wonder myself, and I begin to doubt, and I have a fearful haunting feeling that I should never have married Maxim, that we are not going to be happy. You see, I know that all the time, whenever I meet anyone new, they are all thinking the same thing— How different she is to Rebecca.”
I stopped, breathless, already a little ashamed of my outburst, feeling that now at any rate I had burnt my boats for all time. He turned to me lookmg very concerned and troubled.
“Mrs. de Winter, please don’t think that,” he said. “For my Maxim. It will make all the difference to his life. I am positive that you will make a great success of it. From my point of view it’s— it’s very refreshing and charming to find someone like yourself who is not entirely— er—” he blushed, searching for a word, “not entirely au fait, shall we say, with ways at Manderley. And if the people around here give you the impression that they are criticising you, it’s— well— it’s most damnably offensive of them, that’s all. I’ve never heard a word of criticism, and if I did I should take great care that it was never uttered again.”
“That’s very sweet of you, Frank,” I said, “and what you say helps enormously. I dare say I’ve been very stupid. I’m not good at meeting people, I’ve never had to do it, and all the time I keep remembering how— how it must have been at Manderley before, when there was someone there who was born and bred to it, did it" all naturally and without effort. And I realise, every day, that things I lack, confidence, grace, beauty, intelligence, wit— oh, all the qualities that mean most in a woman— she possessed. It doesn’t help, Frank, it doesn’t help.”
He said nothing. He went on looking anxious and distressed. He pulled out his handkerchief and blew his nose.
“You must not say that,” he said.
“Why not? It’s true,” I said.
You have qualities that are just as important, far more
SO, in fact. If s perhaps cheeky to me to say so, I don^’t know you very well. Tm a bachelor, I dont know very much about women, I lead a quiet sort of life down here at Manderley as you know, but I should say that kindliness, and sincerity, and if I may say so— modesty—are worth far more to a man, to a husband, than all the wit and beauty in the world."^ He looked very agitated, and blew his nose again. I saw that I had upset him far more than I had upset myself, and the reahsation of this calmed me and gave me a feeling of superiority. I wondered why he was making such a fuss. After all, I had not said so very much. I had only confessed my sense of insecurity, following as I did upon Rebecca. And she must have had these qualities that he presented tome as mine. She must have been kind and sincere, with all her friends, her boundless popularity. I was not sure what he meant by modesty. It was a word I bad never understood. I always imagined it had something to do with minding meeting people in a passage on the way to a bathroom.... Poor Frank. And Beatrice had called him a dull man, with never a word to say for himself.
'‘Well,” I said, rather embarrassed, "well, I don't know about all that. I don’t think I’m very kind, or particularly sincere, and as for being modest, I don’t think I’ve ever had much of a chance to be anything else. It was not very modest, of course, being married hurriedly like tbat, down in Monte Carlo, and being alone there in that hotel, beforehand, but perhaps you don’t count that?”
"My dear Mrs. de Winter, you don’t think I imagine for one moment that your meeting down there was not entirely above board?” be said in a low voice.
"No, of course not,” I said gravely. Dear Frank. I think I had shocked him. What a Frank-ish expression, too, "above hoard.” It made one think immediately of the sort of things that would happen below board.
"I’m sure,” he began, and hesitated, his expression still troubled, "I’m sure that Maxim would be very worried, very distressed, if he knew how you felt. I don’t think he can have any idea of it.”
“You won't tell him?” I said hastily.
“No, naturally not, what do you take me for? But you see, Mrs. de Winter, I know Maxim pretty well, and Tve seen him through many... moods. If he thought you were worrying about—well—about the past, it would distress him more than anything on earth. I can promise you that. He's looking very well, very fit, but Mrs. Lacy was quite right the other day when she said he had been on the verge of a breakdown last year, though it was tactless of her to say so in front of him. That's why you are so good for him. You are fresh and young
—and sensible, you have nothing to do with all that time that has gone. Forget it, Mrs. de Winter, forget it, as he has done, thank heaven, and the rest of us. We none of us want to bring back the past, Maxim least of all. And it's up to you, you know, to lead us away from it. Not to take us back there again.”
He was right, of course he was right. Dear good Frank, my friend, my ally. I had been selfish and hyper-sensitive, a martyr to my own inferiority complex. “I ought to have told you all this before,” I said.
“I wish you had,” he said. "I might have spared you some worry.”
“I feel happier,” I said, “'‘much happier. And I've got you for my friend, whatever happens, haven't I, Frank?”
“Yes, indeed,” he said.
We were out of the dark wooded drive and into the light again. The rhododendrons were upon us. Their hour would soon be over. Already they looked a little over-blown, a little faded. Next month the petals would fall one by one from the great faces, and the gardeners would come and sweep them away. Theirs was a brief beauty. Not lasting very long.
“Frank,” I said, “before we put an end to this conversation, for ever let's say, will you promise to answer me one thing, quite truthfully?”
He paused, looking at me a little suspiciously. “That's not quite fair,” he said, “you might ask me something that I should not be able to answer, something quite impossible.”
‘"No,” I said, 'Ifs not that sort of question. Ifs not intimate or personal or anything like that.'^
“Very well, TU do my best he said.
We came round the sweep of the drive and Manderley was before us, serene and peaceful m the hollow of the lawns, surprising me as it always did, with its perfect symmetry and grace, its great simphcity.
The sunlight flickered on the mullioned windows, and there was a soft rusted glow about the stone walls where the lichen clung, A thin column of smoke curled from the library chimney. I bit my thumb nail, watching Frank out of the tail of my eye.
“Tell me,” I said, my voice casual, not caring a bit, “tell me, was Rebecca very beautiful?”
Frank waited a moment. I could not see his face. He was looking away from me towards the house. “Yes,” he said slowly, “yes, I suppose she was the most beautiful creature We went up the steps then to the hall, and I rang the bell for tea.
IBID NOT see much of Mrs. Danvers. She kept very much to herself. She still rang the house telephone to the morningroom every day and submitted the menu to me as a matter of form, but that was the limit of our intercourse. She had engaged a maid for me, Clarice, the daughter of somebody on the estate, a nice quiet well-maxmered girl, who, thank heaven, had never been in service before and had no alarming standards. I think she was the only person in the house who
Stood in awe of me. To her I was the mistress, I was Mrs. de Winter. The possible gossip of the others could not affect her. She had been away for some time, brought up by an aunt jSfteen miles away, and in a sense she was as new to Manderley as I was. I felt at ease with her. I did not mind saying:
“Oh, Clarice, would you mend my stocking?’’
The housemaid AHce had been so superior. I used to sneak my chemises and nightgowns out of my drawer and mend them myself rather than ask her to do them. I had seen her once, with one of my chemises over her arm, examining the plain material with its small edging of lace, I shall never forget her expression. She looked almost shocked, as though h^ own personal pride had received a blow. I had never thought about my underclothes before. As long as they were clean and neat I had not thought the material or the existence of lace mattered. Brides one read about had trousseaux, dozens of sets at a time, and I had never bothered. Alice’s face taught me a lesson. I wrote quickly to a shop in London and asked for a catalogue of under-linen. By the time I had made my choice Alice was looking after me no longer and Clarice was installed instead. It seemed such a waste buying new underclothes for Clarice that I put the catalogue away in a drawer and never wrote to the shop after all.
I often wondered whether Ahce told the others, and if my underclothes became a topic of conversation in the servants’ hall, something rather dreadful, to be discussed in low tones when the men were nowhere about. She was too superior for it to be mad© a joking question. Phrases Hke “Chemise to you” would never be bandied between her and Frith for instance.
No, my underclothes were more serious than that More Hke a divorce case heard in cumerci,. , , At any rate I was glad when Alice surrendered me to Clarice. Clarice would never know real lac© from false. It was considerate of Mrs. Danvers to have engaged her. She must have thought we would he fit company, one for the other. Now that I knew the reason for Mrs. Danvers’ dislike and resentment it made things a little easier. I knew it was not lust me nersonally
she hated, but what I represented. She would have felt the same towards anyone who had taken Rebecca's place. At least that was what I understood from Beatrice the day she came to lunch.
'‘Did not you know?” she had said, "she simply adored Rebecca.”
The words had shocked me at the time. Somehow I had not expected them. But when I thought it over I began to lose my first fear of Mrs. Danvers. I began to be sorry for her. I could imagine what she must feel. It must hurt her every time she heard me called "Mrs. de Winter.” Every morning when she took up the house telephone and spoke to me, and I answered "Yes^ Mrs. Danvers,” she must be thinking of another voice. When she passed through the rooms and saw traces of me about the place, a beret on a window seat, a bag of knitting on a chair, she must think of another one, who had done these things before. Even as I did. I, who had never known Rebecca. Mrs. Danvers knew how she walked and how she spoke. Mrs. Danvers knew the colour of her eyes, her smile, the texture of her hair. I knew none of these things, had never asked about them, but sometimes I felt Rebecca was as real to me as she was to Mrs. Danvers.
Frank had told me to forget the past, and I wanted to forget it. But Frank did not have to sit in the morning-room as I did, every day, and touch the pen she had held between her fingers. He did not have to rest his hands on the blotter, and stare in front of him at her writing on the pigeon-holes. He did not have to look at the candlesticks on the mantelpiece, the clock, the vase in which the flowers stood, the pictures on the walls and remember, every day, that they belonged to her, she had chosen them, they were not mine at all. Frank did not have to sit at her place in the dining-room, hold the knife and fork that she had held, drink from her glass. He did not throw a coat over his shoulders which had been hers, nor find her handkerchief in the pocket. He did not notice, every day, as I did, the blind gaze of the old dog in its basket in the Hbrary, who Hfted its head when it heard ny footstep, the footstep of a woman, and sniffing the air
drooped its Lead again, because I was not the one it sought.
Little things, meaningless and stupid in themselves, but they were there for me to see, for me to hear, for me to feel. Dear God, I did not want to think about Rebecca. I wanted to be happy, to make Maxim happy, and I wanted us to be together. There was no other wish in my heart but that. I could not help it if she came to me in thoughts, in dreams. I could not help it if I felt like a guest in Manderley, my home, walking where she had trodden, resting where she had lain. I was like a guest, biding my time, waiting for the return of the hostess. Little sentences, little reproofs reminding me every hour, every day.
‘Trith,’' I said, coming into the library on a summer morning, my arms full of lilac, “Frith, where can I find a tall vase for these? They are all too small in the flower-room.^'
“The white alabaster vase in the drawing-room was always used for the lilac. Madam,"
“Oh, wouldn't it be spoilt? It might get broken."
“Mrs. de Winter always used the alabaster vase. Madam."
“Oh, oh, I see."
Then the alabaster vase was brought for me, already filled with water, and as I put the sweet lilac in the vase and arranged the sprigs, one by one, the mauve warm scent filling the room, mingling with the smell of the new-mown lawn outside coming from the open window, I thought; “Rebecca did this. She took the lilac, as I am doing, and put the sprigs one by one in the white vase. Tm not the fixst to do it. This is Rebecca's vase, this is Rebecca's lilac." She must have wandered out into the garden as I did, in that floppy garden hat I had seen once at the hack of a cupboard in the flowerroom, hidden under some old cushions, and crossed the lawn to the hlac bushes, whistling perhaps, humming a tune, calling to the dogs to follow her, carrying in her hands the scissors that I carried now.
Frith, could you move that book-stand from the table in the window, and I will put the lilac there?"
“Mrs. de Winter always had the alabaster vase on the table behind the sofa, Madam."
"'Oil, well...” I hesitated, the vase in my hands, Frith's face impassive. He would obey me of course if I said I preferred to put the vase on the smaller table by the window. He would move the book-stand at once.
'‘All right,” I said, "perhaps it would look better on the larger table,” And the alabaster vase stood, as it had always done, on the table behind the sofa....
Beatrice remembered her promise of a wedding present. A large parcel arrived one morning, almost too large for Robert to carry. I was sitting in the mornmg-room, having just read the menu for the day. I have always had a childish love of parcels. I snipped the string excitedly, and tore off the dark brown paper. It looked like books. I was right. It was books. Four big volumes. A History of Fainting. And a sheet of notepaper in the first volume saymsf "I hone this is the sort of thing you like,” and signed "Love from Beatrice.” I could see her going into the shop in Wigmore Street and buying them. Looking about her in her abrupt, rather masculine way.
"I want a set of books for someone who is keen on Art,” she would say, and the attendant would answer, "Yes, Madam, will you come this way?” She would finger the volumes a little suspiciously. “Yes, that’s about the price. It’s for a wedding present. I want them to look good. Are these all about Art?”
"Yes, this is the standard work on the subject,” the assistant would say. And then Beatrice must have written her note, and paid her cheque, and given the address “Mrs. de Winter, Manderley.”
It was nice of Beatrice. There was something rather sincere and pathetic about her going oflE to a shop in London and buying me these books because she knew I was fond of painting. She imagined me, I expect, sitting down on a wet day and looking solemnly at the illustrations, and perhaps getting a sheet of drawing-paper and a paint-box and copying one of the pictures. Dear Beatrice. I had a sudden, stupid desire to cry. I gathered up the heavy volumes and looked round the morning-room for somewhere to put them. They were out of place in that fragile delicate room. Never mind, it was my room now, after all. I arranged them m a row on the top of
the desk. They swayed dangerously, leaning one against the other. I stood back a bit, to watch the effect. Perhaps I moved too quickly, and it disturbed them. At any rate the foremost one fell, and the others slid after it. They upset a little china cupid who had hitherto stood alone on the desk except for the candlesticks. He fell to the ground, hitting the waste-paper basket as he did so, and broke into fragments. I glanced hurriedly at the door, like a guilty child. I knelt on the floor and swept up the pieces into my hand. I found an envelop© to put -iem in. I hid the envelope at the back of one of the drawers in the desk. Then I took the books off to the library and found room for them on the shelves.
Maxim laughed when I showed them to him with pride.
“Dear old Bee,’' he said, “you must have had a success with her. She never opens a book if she can help it."
“Did she say anything about— well—what she thought of me?” I asked.
“The day she came to lunch? No, I don't think so.”
“I thought she might have written or something.”
“Beatrice and I don't correspond unless there's a major event in the family. Writing letters is a waste of time,” said Maxim.
I supposed I was not a major event. Yet if I had been Beatrice, and had a brother, and the brother married, surely one would have said something, expressed an opinion, written two words? Unless of course on© had taken a dislike to the wife, or thought her imsuitahle. Then of course it would be different. Still, Beatrice had taken the trouble to go up to London and to buy the books for me. She would not have done that if she disliked me.
It was the following day I remember, when Frith, who had brought in the coffee after lunch to the library, waited a moment, hovering behind Maxim, and said,
“Could I speak to you, sir?” Maxim glanced up from his paper,
“Yes, Frith, what is itF' he said, rather surprised. Frith wore a stiff solemn expression, his bps pursed. I thought at once his wife had died.
“It's about Robert, sir. There has been a slight unpleasantness between him and Mrs. Danvers. Robert is very upset."
“Oh, Lord,” said Maxim, making a face at me. I bent down to fondle Jasper, my unfailing habit in moments of embarrassment.
“Yes, sir. It appears Mrs. Danvers has accused Robert of secreting a valuable ornament from the morning-room. It is Robert’s business to bring in the fresh flowers to the morningroom and place the vases. Mrs. Danvers went in this morning after the flowers had been done, and noticed one of the ornaments was missing. It was there yesterday, she said She accused Robert of either taking the ornament or breaking it and concealing the breakage. Robert demed both accusations most emphatically, and came to me nearly in tears, sir. You may have noticed he was not himself at lunch.”
“I wondered why he handed me the cutlets without giving me a plate,” murmured Maxim. “I did not know Robert was so sensitive. Well, I suppose someone else did it. One of the maids.”
“No, sir. Mrs. Danvers went into the room before the girl had done the room. Nobody had been there since Madam yesterday, and Robert first thing with the flowers. It makes it very impleasant for Robert and myself, sir.”
“Yes, of course it does. Well, you had better ask Mrs. Danvers to come here and we’ll get to the bottom of it. What ornament was it, anyway?”
“The china cupid, sir, that stands on the writing-table.”
“Oh^ Oh, Lord. That’s one of our treasures, isn’t it? It will have to be found. Get hold of Mrs. Danvers at once.”
“Very good, sir.”
Frith left the room and we were alone again. “What a confounded nuisance,” said Maxim, “that cupid is worth a hell of a lot. How I loathe servants’ rows too. I wonder why they come to me about it. That’s your job, sweetheart.”
I looked up from Jasper, my face red as fire. “Darling,” I said, “I meant to tell you before, but— but I forgot. The fact is I broke that cupid when I was in the morning-room yesterday.”
‘‘You broke it? Well, why tbe devil didn’t you say so when Fritb was here?”
“I don’t know. I didn’t like to. I was afraid he would think me a fool.”
“Hell think you much more of a fool now. You’ll have to explain to him and Mrs. Danvers.”
“Oh, no, please, Maxim, you tell them. Let me go upstairs.”
“Don’t b© a little idiot. Anyone wordd think you were afraid of them,”
“I am afraid of them. At least, not afraid, but..
The door opened, and Frith ushered Mrs. Danvers into the room- I looked nervously at Maxim. He shrugged his shoulders, half-amused, half-angry.
“It’s all a mistake, Mrs. Danvers. Apparently Mrs. de Winter broke the cupid herself and forgot to say anything,” said Maxim.
They all looked at me. It was like being a child again. I was still aware of my guilty flush. T’m so sorry,” I said, watching Mrs. Danvers. “I never thought Robert would get into trouble.”
“Is it possible to repair tbe ornament, Madam?” said Mrs. Danvers. She did not seem to be surprised that I was the culprit. She looked at me with her white skull’s face and her dark eyes. I felt she had known it was me all along and had accused Robert to see if I would have the courage to confess.
“I’m afraid not,” I said; “it smashed in little pieces.”
“What did you do with the pieces?” said Maxim.
It was like being a prisoner, giving evidence. How paltry and mean my actions sounded, even to myself. “I put them all into an envelope,” I said.
“Well, what did you do with the envelope?” said Maxim, lighting a cigarette, his tone a mixture of amusement and exasperation.
I put it at the hack of one of the drawers in the writingdesk,” I said.
“It looks as though Mrs. de Winter thought you would put her in prison, doesn’t it. Mrs. Danvers?” said Maxim;
‘‘perhaps you would find the envelope and send the pieces up to London. If they are too far gone to mend it can t be helped. AU right. Frith. Tell Robert to dry his tears.'^ Mrs. Danvers lingered when Fnth had gone. “I will apologise to Robert of course" she said, “but the evidence pointed so strongly to him. It did not occur to me that Mrs. de Winter had broken the ornament herself. Perhaps, if such a thing should happen again, Mrs. de Winter will tell me personally, and I will have the matter attended to? It would save everybody a lot of unpleasantness.”
“Naturally,” said Maxim impatiently, “I can't think why she didn't do so yesterday. I was just going to tell her when you came into the room.”
“Perhaps Mrs. de Winter was not aware of the value of the ornament?” said Mrs. Danvers, turning her eyes upon me.
“Yes,” I said wretchedly. “Yes, I was afraid it was valuable. That's why I swept the pieces up so carefully.”
“And hid them at the back of the drawer where no one would find them, eh?” said Maxim, with a laugh, and a shrug of the shoulders. “Is not that the sort of thing the betweenmaid is supposed to do, Mrs. Danvers?”
“The between-maid at Manderley would never be allowed to touch the valuable things in the morning-room, sir,” said Mrs. Danvers.
‘^No, I can t see you letting her,” said Maxim.
“It's very unfortunate,” said Mrs. Danvers; “I don't think we have ever had any breakages in the morning-room before. We were always so particular. I've done the dusting in there myself since— last year. There was no one I could trust. When Mrs. de Winter was ahve we used to do the valuables together.”
‘"Yes, well— it can't be helped,” said Maxim. “AU right, Mrs. Danvers.”
She went out of the room, and I sat on the window seat, looking out of the window. Maxim picked up his paper again.
“I'm awfully sorry, darling,” I said, after a moment, “it was verv careless of me. I can't think how it happened, I was just
arranging those books on the desk, to see if they would stand, and the cupid shpped.”
“My sweet child, forget it. What does it matter?'’
“It does matter. I ought to have been more careful. Mrs. Danvers must be furious with me.”
“What the devil has she got to be furious about? It’s not her bit of china.”
“No, but she takes such a pride in it all. It's so awful to think nothing in there has ever been broken before. It had to be me.”
“Better you than the luckless Robert.”
“I wish it had been Robert. Mrs. Danvers will never forgive me.”
“Damn Mrs. Danvers,” said Maxim, “sbe's not God Almighty, is she? I can't understand you. What do you mean by saying you are aiEraid of her?”
“I did not mean afraid exactly. I don't see much of her. It's not that. I can't really explain.”
“You do such extraordinary things,” said Maxim; “fancy not getting hold of her when you broke the thing and saying,
‘Here, Mrs. Danvers, get this mended.' She'd understand that. Instead of which you scrape up the remains in an envelope and hide ’em at the back of a drawer. Just like a betweenmaid, as I said, and not the mistress of a house.”
“I am Hke a between-maid,” I said slowly, “I know I am, in lots of ways. That's why I have so much in common with Clarice. We are on tlie same sort of footing. And that's why she likes me. I went and saw her mother the other day. And do you know what she said? I asked her if she thought Clarice was happy with us, and she said, ^Oh, yes, Mrs. de Winter. Clarice seems quite happy. She says, “It’s not like being with a lady, Mum, it s like being with one of ourselves.” ’ Do you suppose she meant it as a compliment or not?”
Ood knows, said Maxim. ^^ReTnemhering Clarice's mother I should take it as a direct insult. Her cottage is generally a shambles and smells of boiled cabbage, At one time sbe had nine children under eleven, and she herself used to patter nhoni- in fhaf- nf or«rrft>T» -nn cfrrvPo
round her head. We nearly gave her notice to quit. Why Clarice looks as neat and clean as she does I can’t imagine.”
"'She’s been living with an aunt,” I said, feeling rather subdued. “I know my flannel sldrt has a dirty mark down the front, but IVe never walked bare-foot with a stocking round my head.” I knew now why Clarice did not disdain my underclothes as Alice had done. "Perhaps that’s why I prefer calling on Clarice’s mother to calling on people like the bishop’s wife?” I went on, "the bishop’s wife never said I was like one of themselves.”
"If you wear that grubby skirt when you call on her I don’t suppose she does,” said Maxim.
"Of course I didn’t call on her in my old skirt, I wore a frock,” I said, "and anyway I don’t think much of people who judge one by one’s clothes.”
"I hardly think the bishop’s wife cares twopence about clothes,” said Maxim, "but she may have been rather surprised if you sat on the extreme edge of the chair and answered
"Yes’ and "No’ like someone after a new job, which you did the only time we returned a call together.”
"I can’t help being shy.”
‘"I know you can’t, sweetheart. But you don’t make an effort to conquer it.”
“I think that’s very unfair,” I said. "I try every day, every time I go out or meet anyone new. I’m always making efforts. You don't understand. It’s all very well for you, you’re used to that sort of thing. I’ve not been brought up to it.”
“Rot,” said Maxim, "it’s not a question of bringing up, as you put it. It’s a matter of application. You don’t think I like calling on people, do you? It bores me stiff. But it has to be
"We’re not talking about boredom,” I said, “there’s nothing to be afraid of in being bored. If I was just bored it would be different. I hate people looking me up and down as though I were a prize cow.”
“Who looks you up and down?”
“All the people down here. Everybody.”
'Wliat does it matter if they do? It gives them some interest in life’ Why must I be the one to supply the interest, and have all the criticism?'
‘‘Because life at Manderley is the only thing that ever interests anybody down here.”
“What a slap in the eye I must he to them then.”
Maxim did not answer. He went on looking at his paper.
“What a slap in the eye I must be to them,” I repeated. And then, “I suppose that’s why you married me,” I said, “you Icnew I was dull and quiet and inexperienced, so that there would never he any gossip about me.”
Maxim threw his paper on the ground and got up from his chair. ‘‘What do you mean?” he said.
His face was dark and queer, and his voice was rough, not his voice at all.
“I— I don't know,” I said, leaning back against the window,
“I don't mean anything. Why do you look hke that?"
“What do you know about any gossip down here?” he said.
“I don’t,” I said, scared by the way he looked at me. “I only said it because— because of something to say. Don't look at me like that, Maxim, what have I said, what’s the matter?”
“Who’s been talking to you?” he said slowly.
“No one. No one at all.”
“Why did you say what you did^”
“I tell you, I don't know. It just came to my head. I was angry, cross. I do hate calhng on these people, I can’t help it. And you criticised me for being shy. I didn't mean it. Really, Maxim, I didn’t. Please beheve me.”
“It was not a particularly attractive thing to say, was it?” he said.
“No,” I said. “No, it was rude, hateful.”
He stared at me moodily, his hands in his pockets, rocking backwards and forwards on his heels. “I wonder if I did a very selfish thing in marrying you,” he said. He spoke slowly, tlioughtfully.
I felt very cold, rather sick. “How do you mean'^” I said.
“I'm not much of a comnanion to vou. am I?” ho
“There are too many years between us. You ought to have waited, and then married a boy of your own age. Not someone like myself, with half his life behind him.”
“That s ridiculous,” I said hurriedly, “you know age doesn’t mean anything in marriage. Of course we axe companions.”
“Are we? I don’t know,” he said.
I knelt upon the window seat and put my arms round his shoulders. “Why do you say these things to me?” I said, “you know I love you more than anythmg in the world. There has never been anyone but you. You are my father and my brother and my son. All those things.”
“It was my fault,” he said, not listening. “I rushed you into it. I never gave you a chance to think it over.”
“I did not want to think it over,” I said, “there was no other choice. You don’t understand, Maxim. When one loves a person...”
“Are you happy here?” he said, looking away from me, out of the window. “I wonder sometimes. You’ve got thinner. Lost your colour.”
“Of course I’m happy,” I said, “I love Manderley, I love the garden, I love everything. I don’t mind calling on people.
I )ust said that to be tiresome. I’ll call on people every day, if you want me to. I don’t mind what I do. I’ve never for one moment regretted marrying you, surely you must know that?”
He patted my cheek in his terribly absent way, and bent down, and kissed the top of my head. “Poor lamb, you don’t have much fun, do you? I’m afraid I’m very difficult to live with.”
“You’re not difficult,” I said eagerly, “you are easy, very easy. Much easier than I thought you would be. I used to think it would be dreadful to be married, that one’s husband would drink, or use awful language, or grumble if the toast was soft at breakfast, and be rather unattractive altogether, smell possibly. You don’t do any of those things.”
“Good God, I hope not,” said Maxim, and he smiled.
I seized advantage of his smile, I smiled too, and took his hands and kissed them. “How absurd to say we are not compamons,” I said, “why, look how we sit here every evening.
io
you witli a book or paper, and me witb my knitting. Just like cups of tea. Just like old people, married for years and years. Of course we are companions. Of course wo are bappy. You talk as though you thought we had made a mistake. You don’t mean it like that, do you, Maxim? You know our marriage is a success, a wonderful success?’'
“If you say so, then it’s ail right,” he said.
“No, hut you think it too, don't you, darling? It's not just me? We are happy, aren’t we? Terribly happy?”
He did not answer. He went on staring out of the window while I held his hands. My throat felt dry and tight, and my eyes were burning. Oh, God, I thought, this is like two people in a play, in a moment the curtain will come down, we shall bow to the audience, and go off to our dressing-rooms. This can’t be a real moment in the hves of Maxim and myself. I sat down on the window seat, and let go of his hands. I heard myself speakmg in a hard cool voice. “If you don’t think we are happy it would be much better if you would admit it. I don’t want you to pretend anything. I’d much rather go away. Not live with you any more.” It was not really happening of course. It was the girl in the play talking, not me to Maxim. I pictured the type of girl who would play the part. Tall and slim, rather nervy.
“Well, why don’t you answer me?” I said.
He took my face in his hands and looked at me, just as he had before, when Frith had come into the room with tea, the day we went to the beach.
How can I answer you?” he said. “I don’t know the answer myself. If you say we are happy, let’s leave it at that. It’s something I know nothing about. I take your word for it. We are happy. All right then, that’s agreed!” He kissed me again, and then walked away across the roorh. I went on sitting by the wmdow, stiff and straight, my hands in my lap.
You say all this because you are disappointed in me,” I said. I m gauche and awkward, I dress badly, I’m shy with people.^ I warned you in Monte Carlo how it would be. You think I’m not right for Manderley.”
“Don’t talk nonsense,” he said. “I’ve never said vou dressed
ll badly, or were gauche. Ifs your imagination. As for being shy, yonll get over that. IVe told you so before.”
''WeVe argued in a circle,” I said, “weVe come right back to where we started. This all began because I broke tfie cupid in the morning-room. If I hadn’t broken the cupid none of this would have happened. We’d have drunk our coflFee, and gone out into the garden.”
“Oh, damn that infernal cupid,” said Maxim wearily. “Do you really think I care whether it’s in ten thousand pieces or not?”
“Was it very valuable?”
“Heaven knows. I suppose so. IVe really forgotten.”
“Are all those things in the mormng-room valuable?”
“Yes, I believe so.”
“Why were all the most valuable things put in the morningroom^”
“I don’t know. I suppose because they looked well there.”
“Were they always there? When your mother was aHve?”
“No. No, I don’t think they were. They were scattered about the house. The chairs were in a lumber room, I b'=‘lieve.”
“When was the morning-room furnished as it is now?”
“When I was married.”
“I suppose the cupid was put there then?”
“I suppose so.”
“Was that found in a lumber room?”
“No. No, I don’t think it was. As a matter of fact I believe it was a wedding present. Rebecca knew a lot about china.”
I did not look at him. I began to polish my nails. He had said the word quite naturally, quite calmly. It had been no effort to him. After a minute I glanced at him swiftly. He was standing by the mantelpiece, his hands in his pockets. He was staring straight in front of him. He is thinking about Rebecca, I said to myself- He is thinking how strange it was that a wedding present to me should have been the cause of destroying a wedding present to Rebecca. He is thinking about the cupid. He is remembering who gave it to Rebecca. He IS going over in his mind how the parcel came and how pleased she was, Rebecca knew a lot about china. Perhaps he
came into the room, and she was kneeling on the floor, wrenchmg open the little crate in which the cupid was packed. She must have glanced up at hii^, and smiled. “Look, Max^ she would have said, “look what we’ve been sent.” And she then would have plunged her hand down into the shavings and brought out the cupid who stood on one foot, his bow in his hand. “We’ll have it in the morning-room,” she must have said, and he must have knelt down beside her, and they must have looked at the cupid together.
I went on pohshing my nails. They were scrubby, like a schoolboy’s nails. The cuticles grew up over the half moons. The thumb was bitten nearly to the quick. I looked at Maxim again. He was still standing in front of the fireplace.
“What are you thinking about?” I said.
My voice was steady and cool. Not hke my heart, thumping inside me. Not like my mind, bitter and resentful. He lit a cigarette, surely the twenty-fifth that day, and we had only just fiiushed lunch; he threw the match into the empty grate, he picked up the paper.
“Nothing very much, why?” he said.
“Oh, I don’t know,” I said, “you looked so serious, so far away.”
He whistled a tune absently, the cigarette twisting in his fingers. “As a matter of fact I was wondering if they had chosen the Surrey side to play Middlesex at the Oval,” he said.
He sat down in the chair again and folded the paper. I looked out of the window. Presently Jasper came to me and climbed on my lap.